1
PATHWAYS 
TO EXCELLENCE
School Improvement Tool for School Leaders
2
3INTRODUCTION
Pathways to Excellence (P2E) is a tool for school leaders to diagnose the quality of education in their school, 
identify areas for improvement and drive meaningful change.  
Every school is unique and at a different stage in the school improvement journey. For this purpose, the 
tool supports schools starting at different levels. By taking leaders step-by-step through a series of action 
points, leaders are empowered to take full ownership over the creation and implementation of their School 
Development Plans .
OVERVIEW AND STRUCTURE:
Pathways to Excellence is organised into three focus areas across 18 domains of school quality. Each domain 
is broken down into self-assessment criteria  across four levels - with level four indicating the highest level  
of quality provision.
On an annual basis, school leaders conduct a School Self-Assessment , using the self-assessment criteria  
to score themselves from level one to four across the 18 domains. Using the results of their School  
Self-Assessment, school leaders work with stakeholders in their school community to create a School 
Development Plan to improve upon areas of greatest need. School leaders are encouraged to target 2-4 areas  
for improvement each year using the action points and support resources outlined in Pathways to Excellence.
Focus Are a P2E Domai n
School  
Culture
School  
Management
Teaching 
and L earning•Clean and Safe Environment for L earning
•Teacher R ecruitment
•Finance and Business Management
•Mark eting and Branding
•School L eadership and Governance
•Teacher Development and Oversight
•Teaching and L earning R esources
•Lesson Planning and Deliver y
•Assessment of L earning
•Learner- Centred T eaching and L earning
•School Curriculum
•Early Childhood Education 4INCLUSIVE EDUCATION
P2E INTRODUCTORY BRIEF ON INCLUSIVE EDUCATION:
Every learner that enters a classroom is unique, shaped by forces that include, among others, their ethnicity, 
socio-economic status, disability , language and culture, geographic location, personal experiences, gender , 
religion and race.
Inclusive education  considers the distinctive needs and experiences of all learners. It recognises that 
policies, teaching methods and curriculums may not be equally effective for all learners, and that learners 
may sometimes face different barriers  to learning. Inclusive education pays particular attention to the 
learning and developmental needs of all learners, including those who may be vulnerable, such as those from 
minority backgrounds or those who have special educational needs and disabilities . For instance, a girl with  
a disability who is from a minority ethnic and religious background may face multiple discrimination due to her 
intersecting identities.
Inclusive schools help to create a more inclusive, equitable, safe and accessible learning environment for 
all learners, in line with Sustainable Development Goal 4. While not an exhaustive list, an inclusive school is 
typically characterised by:
 ●All means ALL as a principle of Education for ALL 
 ●A safe, accessible, inclusive and supportive school environment, where policies and  
their implementation allow all learners to thrive and due support is provided for anyone  
who may be experiencing any kind of discrimination or harassment  
 ●Efforts to eliminate gender and  disability stereotypes  and biases, which can limit  
the educational opportunities of learners, from the curriculum and teaching methods  
 ●Representation of a diverse range of role models, texts and activities that are true to  
the experiences, potential and perspective of all learners  
 ●Use of language that is inclusive, gender neutral and accessible to all learners  
 ●Encouragement for active participation of all learners in school decision-making and  
leadership opportunities  
 ●Equitable working conditions, access to professional development and promotion  
opportunities, compensation and representation on leadership teams for all teachers  
 ●Collaboration with families and communities to promote gender equity  and disability  
inclusion  in education  
 ●Monitoring and evaluation of progress towards inclusive goals with ongoing adaption  
of strategies to best meet the learning needs of all learners
An inclusive school is continuously working to improve and provide the best possible education for all learners.
Inclusive education cuts across all P2E key areas and domains and must therefore inform the design, 
implementation and evaluation of school policies, programmes and practices. Throughout all P2E domains, 
reminders and suggestions are provided for schools to consider, respond to and respect inclusion to close 
gaps on gender disparity, eradicate all forms of discrimination and advance equality and inclusion in society. ¹
5
6HOW TO USE
PATHWAYS TO EXCELLENCE
6Within the Pathways to Excellence tool there are 18 domains , with each domain containing self-assessment 
criteria on the left-hand page and action points on the right-hand page.
Towards the end of the guide, leaders can find a glossary and guidelines to support school development planning.
Action Points Self-Assessment 
Criteria
7HOW TO COMPLETE THE SELF-ASSESSMENT:
As a first step, school leaders assess their current  school  situation and provision against all 18 domains,  
using  the  self-assessment  criteria to rate themselves  between levels  1  and  4. The higher the level, the better  
the quality of education in the school. 
Assigning a Level for Each Domain
Each domain has four levels. The levels have a fixed number of assessment criteria, with levels 1 and 2 
having four criteria, level 3 having six, and level 4 having eight.
Leaders must read, and ‘assess’ themselves against the self-assessment criteria. Every school starts at  
level 1. Please note that level 1 shows an ‘absence’ of foundational practice, therefore some of the  
assessment criteria is written as a negative. For example, in the Behaviour Management domain, the first 
criteria in level 1 is written as follows:
 ͢There is no consistent whole school approach to behaviour management.
School leaders should only tick the criteria that is representative of the situation in the school.
To qualify beyond level 1, schools must have some foundational practice in place. Once schools progress 
beyond level 1, the overall school level is determined by the highest level where at least 75% or more of 
criteria (in level 2, 3 or 4) is met: 
 ●Level 2:  Meet three of the four assessment criteria
 ●Level 3:  Meet five of the six assessment criteria
 ●Level 4:  Meet six of the eight assessment criteria
This means that if there are six assessment criteria for level three, and the school meets three of the six 
criteria, the school meets 50% of the criteria and would be identified as a Level 2 primary school.
It is important that leaders carefully reflect on their current state of primary provision to ensure that the level 
they obtain in the self-assessment is accurate. This ensures that every primary school starts at the right 
level and receives the right support to progress.
SCHOOL DEVELOPMENT PLANNING:
Once the School Self-Assessment is complete for all domains, school leaders should identify the domains 
that they want to prioritise for the annual School Development Plan . The outcomes of the self-assessment 
should help to identify areas where the school needs to improve. School leaders should combine this self-
assessment with knowledge, advice, and feedback from their multi-stakeholder team .
Review and Selection of Action Points
Having identified the domains that will be the focus of the School Development Plan , school leaders 
should refer to the action points in P2E (right-hand page) to identify the specific actions that will help 
schools progress to the next level and, more importantly, have the biggest impact on learners/staff or 
school management. Action points are written in a way that make them suitable to be included within  
the School Development Plan .8
9SCHOOL CULTURE .............................................................................................. 10
DOMAIN 1: Behaviour Management ...................................................................................... 12
DOMAIN 2: Parent and Community Engagement .......................................................... 14
DOMAIN 3: Child Protection ...................................................................................................... 16
DOMAIN 4: Learner Engagement and Welfare ................................................................ 18
DOMAIN 5: Staff Engagement and Retention .................................................................. 20
DOMAIN 6: Inclusive Education ............................................................................................. 22
SCHOOL MANAGEMENT .............................................................................. 24
DOMAIN 7: Clean and Safe Environment for Learning ............................................... 26
DOMAIN 8: Teacher Recruitment .......................................................................................... 28
DOMAIN 9: Finance and Business Management ......................................................... 30
DOMAIN 10: Marketing and Branding ................................................................................. 32
DOMAIN 11: School Leadership and Governance ......................................................... 34
DOMAIN 12: Teacher Development and Oversight ..................................................... 36
TEACHING AND LEARNING ....................................................................... 38
DOMAIN 13: Teaching and Learning Resources ............................................................ 40
DOMAIN 14: Lesson Planning and Delivery ..................................................................... 42
DOMAIN 15: Assessment of Learning ................................................................................. 44
DOMAIN 16: Learner-Centred Teaching and Learning .............................................. 46
DOMAIN 17: School Curriculum ............................................................................................. 48
DOMAIN 18: Early Childhood  Education ........................................................................... 50
School Self-Assessment Profile ................................................................ 52
School Development Planning Guide .................................................... 53
GLOSSARY ............................................................................................................. 60
9CONTENTS1001
DOMAIN 1 :  Behaviour Management
DOMAIN 2 : Parent and Community Engagement
DOMAIN 3 : Child Protection
DOMAIN 4 : Learner Engagement and Welfare
DOMAIN 5 : Staff Engagement and Retention 
DOMAIN 6 : Inclusive Education  
10SCHOOL 
CULTURE1111
12
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:DOMAIN 1 
Behaviour Management 
LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4 *There is no consistent whole school approach to behaviour management. 
 *Teachers decide on their own consequences for learners often using harmful or embarrassing consequences such as hitting, whipping 
and pinching.
 *School rules do not exist or are not written positively. 
 *Establishing good classroom routines is not a priority at the start of the school year. 
 * Corporal punishment is banned.
 *Positive behaviour is promoted through a school-wide list of desired learner behaviour.
 *Consequences for negative behaviour are clearly defined, are inclusive for boys and girls and those with disabilities, and followed by all staff.
 *Teaching time is used to focus on positive behaviour at the start of the school year. 
 *A behaviour management policy that includes clear steps to positively manage behaviour is in use. 
 *Teaching staff are trained every year on the school’s behaviour management policy, including new staff who arrive. 
 *The senior leadership team supports teachers to establish and reinforce discipline procedures and help to resolve conflicts between learners.  
 *Learning and behaviour expectations are regularly communicated to learners to ensure uniformity across the school. 
 *The behaviour management policy is shared with parents at the start of the school year; behaviour strategies and the reasons for banning 
of corporal punishment are explained. 
 *Parents are communicated with regularly and work together with teachers when there are concerns about learner behaviour. 
 *Teachers, governors and the school community are involved in the ongoing development and review of the behaviour management policy.
 *Behaviour management strategies are regularly shared in teaching staff meetings.
 *Behaviour management training is held for parents and other school community members where strategies that match the school’s 
behaviour management policy are demonstrated.
 *Behaviour management is monitored through lesson observations by the senior leadership team.
 *Interventions are planned for learners who need extra support to behave positively in school. 
 *There is a system to document and record learner behaviour data.
 *Teaching that encourages positive behaviour by learners is regularly timetabled; including social and emotional learning.
 *Experienced teachers’ mentor, share best practice, and work one to one with colleagues to help them improve behaviour management.To develop well-behaved learners, your school should focus on positive approaches to behaviour  
management and ban corporal punishment. A behaviour management policy should be developed that  
clearly states how learners are rewarded for good behaviour, and the consequences learners receive for 
misbehaving. High expectations should be set for all learners; rewards and consequences should not be 
differentiated based on the gender of the learner. Consistent use of a behaviour management policy is vital,  
and all school leaders and teaching staff should be trained to follow it. The behaviour of learners should be 
monitored, and interventions planned for learners who need extra support to behave well. Finally, the  
school should work closely with parents as they are crucial in supporting learners to behave well.13
Action Points
Well-behaved learners achieve more academically, are happier at school and help to create a positive 
school culture, which all help to promote a school. Follow these steps as you make consistent, positive 
behaviour management a focus for your school. 
 ●Ban the use of corporal punishment. 
 ●Promote positive behaviour by having a list of desired learner behaviour and 
expectations for the whole school. 
 ●Create a clear list of consequences for negative behaviour; ensure everyone 
follows so all learners are treated fairly. 
 ●Use teaching time at the start of the year to focus on behaviour expectations  
and establishing clear classroom routines.
 ●Write a behaviour management policy that includes clear steps for how behaviour  
is positively managed at school. 
 ●Train teaching staff every year on the school’s behaviour management policy  
and guidelines; ensure new staff arriving also receive this training. 
 ●Ensure the senior leadership team supports teachers to establish and reinforce 
discipline procedures and help to resolve conflicts between learners. 
 ●Communicate learning and behaviour expectations regularly to learners to ensure 
uniformity across the school. 
 ●Share the behaviour management policy with parents at the start of the school 
year explaining clearly the strategies and why corporal punishment is banned. 
 ●Communicate regularly with parents and work together when there are concerns 
about learner behaviour. 
 ●Involve teachers, governors and the school community in the ongoing development  
and review of the behaviour management policy. 
 ●Regularly share and explore behaviour management strategies in teaching  
staff meetings.
 ●Run behaviour management training for parents and other school community members; 
demonstrate strategies that match the school’s behaviour management policy. 
 ●Monitor behaviour management through lesson observations by the senior 
leadership team.
 ●Plan interventions for learners who need extra support to behave positively in school. 
 ●Develop a system to document and record learner behaviour data. 
 ●Regularly timetable teaching that encourages learners’ positive behaviour and 
consider social and emotional learning practices.
 ●Train experienced teachers to be mentors who share best practice, and work one  
to one with colleagues to help them improve behaviour management.2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 1 Behaviour Management 14
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:Parent and Community Engagement
LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4To engage parents and the community, develop a welcoming, positive atmosphere at your school. Ensure 
regular communication about school events and children’s progress. Be available to speak to parents and  
to hear their concerns. Encourage parental involvement in their child’s learning and hold open days for  
parent-teacher meetings to take place. Involve the community in the running of extra-curricular activities and  
encourage volunteering at events. Partner with local businesses who can provide support and sponsorship  
for the school. Establish a Parent Teacher Association (PTA) to create an active group who can support the  
work of the school and advocate for the right to education for all children, especially girls and children with 
disabilities. Finally, share school facilities with the local community in ways that can be mutually beneficial. 
 *Parents are rarely involved in Parent Teacher Association (PTA) groups.
 *Many parents are not actively involved in their child’s learning. 
 *Communication with parents is infrequent. 
 *Teachers and school leaders are not often available to meet parents.
 *A Parent Teacher Association (PTA) is set up to effectively involve support from the school community to meet the aims of the school.
 *The school works closely with parents to involve them in their child’s learning at school and at home.
 *The school has accurate up-to-date contact information and communicates regularly with parents through written notifications about 
school events and learner information.
 *Teachers and school leaders are available to meet parents who have any queries or concerns. 
 *The PTA plays an active role in the school community. 
 *The school is family friendly, welcoming and open to parents. 
 *New parents are given guidance about school policies and guidelines through an orientation programme. 
 *Parents volunteer to support the school during key school events and extra-curricular activities.
 *Multiple ways of sharing information between school and parents are used to improve communication (e.g. letters, email, text messages, 
class parents, home visits, local language use). 
 *Termly open days take place that include parent teacher meetings that discuss learners progress.
 *The PTA actively supports school development.  
 *The community attend events that celebrate learners’ work and progress.  
 *Local businesses are partnered with the school.  
 *The school curriculum  is enhanced by including community engagement in teaching and learning, for example, parents give career 
presentations and local elders teach local customs. 
 *The school holds informative workshops to educate parents about their role in supporting their child’s development and connects 
families with community resources (e.g. health centre, local library, educational assessment and/or rehabilitation centre)
 *School facilities are shared with the community in ways that benefit both the school and the community. 
 *Feedback is gathered from the community on how the school is performing or how it can be improved. 
 *Progress on meeting School Development Plan targets is reviewed and communicated to the school community. DOMAIN 2 15Effective parental and community engagement enhances learners’ performance as parents become more 
engaged in their child’s learning. It increases volunteer support for school activities and can enhance the 
reputation of a school. Follow these steps as you make parent and community engagement a focus for  
your school. 
 ●Set up a Parent Teacher Association (PTA) to use the school community more 
effectively to support the aims of the school.
 ●Develop relationships with parents to work closely with them, ensuring their 
involvement in their child’s learning at school and help parents support children  
with their learning at home. 
 ●Collect accurate, up-to-date contact information for all parents and communicate 
regularly through written notifications about school events and learner information.
 ●Ensure teachers and school leaders are available to meet parents who have any 
queries or concerns.  
 ●Encourage and support the PTA in playing an active role in the school community. 
 ●Focus on becoming a family friendly and welcoming school.  
 ●Deliver an orientation programme for new parents on school policies and guidelines.
 ●Encourage volunteer support from parents and the community to help run school 
events and extra-curricular activities.
 ●Implement multiple ways to share information between school and parents to improve 
communication (e.g. letters, email, text messages, class parents, home visits, local 
language use). 
 ●Invite parents to termly open days to discuss their children’ s progress with their 
teacher and ensure teachers treat parents as partners in their children’s learning.
 ●Encourage the PTA to actively support school development.  
 ●Invite the community to events that celebrate learners’ work and progress.
 ●Encourage local businesses to partner with the school.  
 ●Enhance the school curriculum by encouraging community involvement in teaching and 
learning, for example, parents giving career presentations and local elders act as the 
resource for teaching customs.
 ●Hold informative workshops to educate parents about their role in supporting their child’s 
development and connect families with community resources (e.g. health centre, local 
library, educational assessment and/or rehabilitation centre). 
 ●Share school facilities with the community in ways that benefit both the school and the 
community, for example holding ICT classes for adult learners.
 ●Gather feedback from the community on how the school is performing or how it can  
be improved. 
 ●Review progress on meeting School Development Plan targets and communicate 
progress made to the school community. 
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 2 Parent and Community Engagement16
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment: *The child protection policy is not fully developed and is not based on international and national frameworks.
 *Learners are exposed to risks and staff use corporal punishment.
 *There is an inconsistent approach to dealing with child protection concerns.
 *Staff and parents have little knowledge of child protection.
 *A child protection policy is written that is easy to understand and is clear that every child has the right to be protected from harm.
 *Child protection risks, including gender and disability-based violence, have been identified in the school.
 *Some child protection concerns are reported and followed up on.
 *Staff and parents/guardians receive some training on child protection.
 *Teachers show strong understanding of the safeguarding policy and how to report when they are concerned about a learners’  
safety and wellbeing.
 *Staff sign a code of conduct that clearly outlines acceptable practice and behaviour.
 *Learners are taught about their rights and what to do when they don’t feel safe.
 *Leaders regularly train teachers and parents/guardians on child protection skills and knowledge.
 *There are designated staff members who lead on child protection and any other major risks to the learners e.g., first aid and fire.
 *Recruitment of staff follows safe recruitment practices including criminal record checks.
 *The child protection policy is reviewed and updated regularly with input from all stakeholders and any necessary changes to school 
practices are included.
 *Reporting channels are used, and reports are responded to sensitively and effectively.
 *Reports are clearly recorded, stored safely, and audited annually.
 *Learners are educated on their rights and there is an environment where learners are confident to approach a member of staff if  
they have a concern.
 *Designated leads for first aid and child protection are trained regularly and ensure that first aid equipment and policies/reporting 
forms are readily available.
 *All visitors are monitored by staff who have criminal record checks or volunteers have their own criminal record check completed.
 *Leaders, teachers, parents, and learners show strong understanding of children’s rights and the child protection policy.
 *Child protection experts provide regular professional development, including training on factors that increase vulnerability.To ensure learners are protected, you should identify all the child protection risks at your school. A child 
protection policy should be written after researching national guidelines that should clearly detail how to  
report suspected cases of child abuse. A clear code of conduct should be written and implemented, and it 
should include a focus on the needs and safety of the most vulnerable learners, including girls and children  
with special needs and disabilities. All staff and stakeholders should be trained in child protection. A  
designated member of staff should be appointed to lead on child protection, and they should keep  
accurate records of all the child protection concerns in your school.Child Protection
LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4DOMAIN 317Keeping all learners safe is the most important responsibility for any school. A safe school with a clear 
commitment to child protection is a selling point for parents deciding which school their child should attend. 
Follow these steps as you make child protection of all girls and boys and particularly those most vulnerable  
to harm, a focus for your school.
 ●Develop and implement a child protection policy that addresses the school’s 
commitment to upholding the rights of the child and zero tolerance of  
corporal punishment.
 ●Identify potential child and safety risks in the school and plan to minimise  
them  (e.g., ensure that your policy addresses risks).
 ●Work with stakeholders (parents, teachers, learners) to develop reporting  
channel(s) and ensure that everyone is aware of how to use them.
 ●Train staff and parents on the rights of a child, the different types of child  
abuse, and how to protect those in their care.
 ●Implement the child protection policy and ensure the implementation plan is 
conveyed and understood through a variety of methods e.g., trainings, staff 
meetings, coaching.
 ●Develop/refine the code of conduct based on national laws, international  
treaties and your child protection policy. Ensure that staff sign it on induction  
and re-sign annually.
 ●Ensure that reporting channels are being used and adapt if they are not.  
Regularly train stakeholders, including learners, on what and how to report.
 ●Establish a realistic child protection training schedule for staff and parents and 
ensure training addresses the risks still present in the school.
 ●Appoint a child protection lead and support them to fulfill their responsibilities.
 ●Ensure that staff recruitment follow safe recruitment practices such as criminal 
record checks and signing the code of conduct on induction.
 ●Audit the safeguarding practices at least once every two years and adapt the policy and 
implementation according to findings.
 ●Audit current reporting channels and adapt to ensure that learners, parents and teachers 
are given as many options as possible to report concerns about learners’ safety.
 ●Annually review reports that have been received, ensure that they are safely stored and 
that the cases were effectively dealt with. Any repeating themes should be noted and 
addressed in next policy update.
 ●Develop a safe system for pick-up times and visitors (e.g., visitors’ book and visitors’ 
badges) and for ensuring visitors are always accompanied while on site.
 ●Ensure learners are aware of their rights through strategies such as engaging lesson  
plans, assemblies, special days, posters etc. Work with staff, parents, and learners to 
develop a positive culture around reporting.
 ●Conduct regular training for child protection leads and ensure that key information is 
displayed around the school e.g., how to report a concern.
 ●Ensure that all stakeholders, including parents and learners, receive induction and annual 
training that is appropriate to them.
 ●Engage with local child protection experts and/or networks to provide support.
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 3 Child Protection18
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment: *Teachers do not believe it is their responsibility to encourage learner engagement. 
 *Socio-emotional and personal needs of learners are not a priority.  
 *Learners lack self-awareness, self-motivation, confidence and independence.
 *Learners lack opportunities to have a voice and take on responsibilities in school.
 *The learning environment makes learners feel safe to make mistakes and they are praised for trying new ideas.
 *All class teachers are aware of their learners’ social and emotional well-being, enabling them to identify any personal issues early in 
order to give individual support. 
 *Strategies are discussed and developed to support disengaged learners; exclusion is not an option. 
 *Learners, especially girls and those with disabilities, take on leadership roles such as prefects and monitors.
 *A learner profile  shows the type of learners the school aims to develop and teachers have high expectations of all learners and 
motivate them to succeed.
 *Learners take responsibility for their own learning, and extend their knowledge in areas that interest them.
 *There are opportunities within the school curriculum  for learners to develop Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) skills.  
 *Strategies such as peer tutoring and friendship buddies are used to encourage learners to help each other learn and play. 
 *Teachers run extra-curricular activities to engage learners outside of the classroom.  
 *Personal, Socio-emotional and Health Education (PSHE) is prioritised as being an important and necessary part of learners’ education. 
 *Learners know they are cared for, valued, respected and have a voice within the school environment; a school council listens to 
learners’ ideas. 
 *Learner progress is a priority for both teachers and learners and progress made is highly visible to both learners and parents.
 *Learners who take responsibility for their own learning, are good role models for the high expectations of the school and meeting 
learner profile expectations are praised.
 *Learners are supported by teachers to set goals for their own learning; this helps increase self-motivation and achievement.
 *A growth mindset culture is driven equally by learners, teachers and leaders. 
 *Disengaged learners are identified and schools work with parents to improve their children’s engagement. 
 *The whole school community is trained and understands the importance of e-safety. (use of internet, digital, and social media in a  
safe and secure way).
 *A trained member of staff is in-charge of the provision of socio-emotional support services to the learners.To have engaged and well-cared-for learners, provide opportunities for learners to take on responsibilities  
in the school without gender and disability bias. Have a school council where learners’ opinions are listened to. 
Ensure teachers focus on learners’ social and emotional wellbeing by supporting learners with friendships and 
incorporating Personal Socio-emotional and Health Education into the curriculum. Develop strategies to support  
learners who are disengaged. Encourage a growth mindset in learners. Develop a learner profile that highlights 
the characteristics of good learners that the school is aiming to nurture and is representative of both boys and 
girls. Finally, provide extra-curricular activities to further engage all learners. 
LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Learner Engagement and WelfareDOMAIN 419
Learners make more progress when they feel happy, well-cared-for and fully engaged in the life of the school. 
Follow these steps as you make learner welfare and engagement a focus for your school. 
 ●Create an environment where learners feel safe to make mistakes and are praised 
for trying new ideas. 
 ●Ensure all class teachers are aware of their learners’ social and emotional well-being 
to give individual support related to learners’ self-awareness, self-management, 
social awareness, relationship skills, and decision-making.
 ●Develop strategies to motivate disengaged learners; exclusion is not an option.  
 ●Arrange for learners, especially girls and those with disabilities, to take on 
leadership roles such as prefects and monitors.
 ●A learner profile is used to show the type of learners the school is aiming to develop 
and teachers have high and clear expectations of all learners, in order to motivate 
learners to succeed. 
 ●Encourage learners to take responsibility for their own learning, and to extend their 
knowledge in areas that interest them. 
 ●Build Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) Skills into the school curriculum.  
 ●Encourage learners to play together and help each other to learn; use strategies  
such as peer tutoring and friendship buddies. 
 ●Ensure teachers run extra-curricular activities to engage learners outside of the classroom.  
 ●Prioritise Personal, Socio-emotional and Health Education (PSHE) as an important part 
of learners’ education.
 ●Ensure learners know they are cared for, valued, respected and have a voice within the 
school environment; create a school council to listen to learners’ ideas.
 ●Ensure that learner progress is a priority for teachers and learners; make the progress 
highly visible to learners and parents. 
 ●Praise learners who take responsibility for their own learning and are good role models 
of the high expectations of the school.  
 ●Support learners to set goals for their own learning to help increase self-motivation  
and achievement. 
 ●Establish a growth mindset culture that is driven equally by learners, teachers and leaders.  
 ●Identify disengaged learners and work with parents to improve their  
children’s engagement. 
 ●Train the whole school community on the importance of e-safety (use of internet, digital, 
and social media in a safe and secure way). 
 ●Train a member of staff to be in-charge of the provision of socio-emotional support 
services to the learners.
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 4 Learner Engagement and Welfare20
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment: *Teachers show little commitment to the school community. 
 *There is a high turnover of staff. 
 *Teachers are not well supported by colleagues or school leaders. 
 *Teacher’s salary payment can be irregular.
 *Teachers are well supported, treated fairly and attend work regularly. 
 *Teacher timetables are realistic, giving teachers time to plan and mark work. 
 *Teachers’ salary is paid regularly.
 *Less experienced teachers are given additional responsibilities to gain experience. 
 *Staff are united by a shared vision and clear objectives, which has created a collaborative environment. 
 *Processes to support teachers with learner behaviour, workload, assessments and personal issues are in place. 
 *Career progression is encouraged through regular professional development opportunities and clear career pathways. 
 *Successes of teachers, including professional development accomplishments and promotions, are celebrated.
 *Senior teachers are paid a higher salary to support the retention of experienced staff.
 *A working group is created to consider incentives for teacher motivation and retention. 
 *An anonymous teacher satisfaction survey is used to provide a good understanding of how teachers feel about working in the school.
 *Fair professional practices are implemented that incentivise teachers to stay.
 *Ways to make teacher workload manageable are prioritised, for example non-contact time/hours are allocated to plan lessons and  
there are designated places for teachers to work.
 *A transparent pay scale is used for teachers that clearly shows salary progression based on yearly increments and managerial responsibility.
 *Continuous professional development opportunities are provided for teachers, without gender or disability bias, that encourage  
career progression.
 *Effective teaching and learning methods are regularly researched and discussed to support teachers to take risks and try new ideas.
 *Clear communication channels ensure teachers are aware of, and provided with opportunities to give feedback on, new school  
policies and initiatives.
 *All teaching and administration staff are aware of the shared goals and objectives and invited to celebrate achievement.To develop a happy and well-motivated teaching team, ensure both male and female staff and those with 
disabilities, feel valued and part of a team working towards shared goals. Provide teachers with professional 
development opportunities – awarded without gender or disability bias – and pathways to further their career 
and praise their successes. Take teacher workload seriously and provide them with time out of the classroom 
to plan and mark work. Finally, ensure teachers are paid fairly and regularly and increase salaries for teachers 
with greater experience and responsibility.
LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Staff Engagement and RetentionDOMAIN 521
A happy well motivated teaching team will perform well, stay longer (increase teacher retention) and 
enhance the school’s reputation as a good employer. Follow these steps as you make staff engagement 
and retention a focus for your school.
 ●Support, encourage and treat teachers fairly so that they will want to attend work  
and feel valued. 
 ●Create teaching timetables that are realistic and achievable and take into account 
teacher workload; allocate time for both lesson planning and marking.  
 ●Ensure teachers are paid regularly. 
 ●Offer less experienced teachers the chance to gain experience by giving them   
additional responsibilities. 
 ●Unite staff around a school vision and set clear objectives to promote a  
collaborative environment.
 ●Collaborate with teaching staff to design processes to support them with  
issues, such as learner behaviour, workload, assessments or personal issues. 
 ●Encourage career progression through regular professional development  
opportunities and clear career pathways for all teachers, without gender or  
disability bias. 
 ●Celebrate the successes of teachers, including professional development 
accomplishments and promotions.
 ●Pay senior teachers a higher salary to help retain experienced staff.
 ●Establish a working group to consider incentives for teacher motivation  
and retention.
 ●Develop an anonymous teacher satisfaction survey to provide a good understanding  
of how teachers feel about working in the school. 
 ●Implement fair professional practices that incentivise teachers to stay. 
 ●Discuss ways to make teacher workload manageable such as reducing class sizes and 
give teachers non-contact time to lesson plan; provide places in school for teachers  
to work outside of the classroom. 
 ●Use a transparent pay scale for teachers that clearly shows salary progression based 
on yearly increments and managerial responsibility. 
 ●Plan and implement continuous professional development opportunities to allow for 
career progression. 
 ●Regularly research and discuss teaching and learning methods within the teaching 
community; encourage teachers to take risks and try new ideas knowing that they  
will be supported in doing so. 
 ●Develop strong communication channels to ensure teachers are aware of, and provided 
with opportunities to give feedback on, new school policies and initiatives.
 ●Ensure all teaching and administration staff are aware of shared goals and objectives; 
celebrate these when achieved. 
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 5 Staff Engagement and Retention22
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment: *There is no inclusive educational policy, nor any mention of inclusion in the school’s vision or mission.
 *The school does not encourage teachers to adapt lesson plans and teaching materials to incorporate inclusive strategies.
 *Teachers lack training on how to support learners with SEND.
 *No guidelines or procedures exist to support learners with SEND.
 *The national SNE / IE policy and guidelines have been researched, providing definitions on SNE and different types of disabilities.
 *An Inclusion Team from school staff have been appointed and are responsible for implementing inclusive practices at the school.
 *Training is provided for teaching staff on inclusive education strategies including differentiation of learning.
 *The school demonstrates a commitment to inclusivity by including inclusive language in the school’s mission, vision, and values statements.
 *The school has a SNE / IE policy written in collaboration with the Inclusion Team.
 *SEND and the SNE / IE Policy are a topic for staff training. Training includes how to assess and support learners with SEND in the classroom.
 *The Inclusion Team are trained to conduct learner needs assessments and where possible receive help from a trained SNE specialist.
 *Teachers understand that it is their responsibility to adapt instruction to meet the needs of all learners.
 *School enrolment rates, attendance and retention are monitored to ensure boys and girls have equal access to education.
 *The school proactively deals with bullying, especially relating to gender, race, religion, ethnicity or disability.
 *A trained SNE specialist is appointed and manages the Inclusion team where applicable.
 *The school has an enrolment policy for types of SEND that the school is able to accommodate.
 *The school has a trained staff in guidance and counseling to handle learners’ psychosocial challenges
 *The SNE specialist, in collaboration with the general teachers and the parents, prepares Individualised Educational Plans (IEPs) for 
every learner identified as having SEND.
 *Adaptations and/ or modifications are made to the physical buildings and facilities of the school to be accessible to learners with 
physical disabilities.
 *The school curriculum  is designed to promote inclusion and considers the diverse and unique needs of all learners.
 *Programmes are available to actively support girls’ and learners with disabilities’ attendance, participation, and achievement at school.
 *Parents are informed of the school’s inclusion practices through regular communication and are encouraged to attend awareness 
sessions at the school.To be an inclusive school that provides a quality education for all learners, make inclusion a focus of your 
school’s mission, vision, and values statement. Have an up-to-date knowledge of national policies on Inclusive 
education (IE) and special needs education (SNE) and develop school policies accordingly. Train teachers on 
disability awareness and inclusive and gender-responsive practices. Proactively support girls and children with 
special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) to attend and participate in school and deal with any bullying, 
discrimination, and violence in school, especially based on gender, ethnicity, race, religion, or disability. Finally, 
create an inclusion team that can assess learners’ needs and provide advice for class teachers on how best  
to support all learners.
LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Inclusive EducationDOMAIN 6 23
An inclusive school supports all learners to make good progress. A school can be recognised for providing 
an excellent education for all learners. Follow these steps as you make inclusion and special educational 
needs a focus for your school.
 ●Research the national SNE / IE policy and guidelines, including definitions of SNE and 
different types SEND.
 ●Appoint an Inclusion Team from school staff who will be responsible for implementing 
inclusive practices at the school.
 ●Provide training for teaching staff on inclusive education strategies.
 ●Demonstrate a commitment to inclusivity by including inclusive language in the 
school’s mission, vision and values statements.
 ●Write the school’s SNE / IE policy in collaboration with the Inclusion Team.
 ●Include SEND and SNE / IE Policy as a topic for staff training. Including how to assess 
and support learners with SEND in the classroom.
 ●Train the Inclusion Team on conducting learner needs assessments; ask for help from  
a trained SNE specialist if possible.
 ●Ensure teachers understand that it is their responsibility to adapt instruction to meet  
the diverse needs of all learners.
 ●Monitor school enrolment rates, attendance and retention to ensure boys and girls, 
including those with special educational needs and disabilities, have equal access  
to education.
 ●Proactively deal with bullying, especially relating to gender, disability, special educational 
need, ethnicity, race or religion.
 ●Hire a trained SNE specialist; appoint them as manager of the current Inclusion Team  
if appropriate.
 ●Write an enrolment policy for types of SEND that the school is able to accommodate.
 ●Train a staff member in guidance and counseling to handle learners’ psychosocial needs.
 ●Ensure that the SNE specialist, in collaboration with the general teachers and the 
parents, prepares Individualised Educational Plans (IEPs) for every learner identified  
as having SEND.
 ●Adapt and/or modify the physical buildings and facilities of the school to be accessible 
to learners with physical disabilities.
 ●Ensure the school curriculum is designed to promote inclusion, gender equality, and 
considers diverse needs of all learners.
 ●Ensure programmes are available to actively support girls’ and learners with disabilities’ 
attendance, participation, and achievements at school.
 ●Keep parents informed of the school’s inclusive practices through regular communication 
and encourage their attendance of awareness sessions at the school.Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 6 Inclusive Education2402
24SCHOOL 
MANAGEMENT
DOMAIN 7 : Clean and Safe Environment for Learning
DOMAIN 8 : Teacher Recruitment 
DOMAIN 9 : School Leadership and Governance
DOMAIN 10 : Finance and Business Management 
DOMAIN 11 : Marketing and Branding 
DOMAIN 12 : Teacher Development and Oversight 25
26
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To create a clean and safe environment for learning, ensure the school building is completed and complies 
with legal safety requirements. Schedule regular cleaning of the school site and perform regular building 
maintenance. Make sure access to the school is controlled. Provide adequate WASH facilities; separate 
washrooms for males and females; teachers and learners. Have separate classrooms available for each 
age group. Finally, plan to improve or modify the school by adapting inaccessible facilities and adding  
new facilities such as a library or ICT room with equal access to learners of all genders and disabilities.
 *The school is located in a noisy or polluted area.
 *The school is inaccessible to learners and the school building is in need of repairs.
 *Cleaning of the school is irregular and there is a shortage of dustbins. 
 *Washrooms are shared by all learners and staff and there is a lack of clean water.
 *The school is located away from hazards and pollution to make the school site as safe as possible.
 *The school building has solid floors, secure doors, windows and desks and complies with all legal safety requirements.
 *There are separate and accessible washrooms for males and females with clean water to wash hands.
 *Clean drinking water is available and food is prepared in a clean environment.
 *Each grade has its own classroom and is equipped with age-appropriate furniture and materials, for example desks are the correct size.
 *Issues with the building and environment are recorded in a log book and repairs are prioritised based on importance.
 *Access to the school is controlled to keep learners safe.
 *Daily cleaning procedures are timetabled to keep the school continuously clean. The importance of keeping the school clean is 
understood by staff and learners.
 *There are separate and accessible washrooms with clean and reliable water for both male and female learners, and male and female staff.
 *The school has policies to support an inclusive and safe environment for learning; including a child protection policy, anti-bullying policy 
and fire safety policy.
 *A nutritious and varied school menu that supports learners to have a healthy and balanced diet is provided.  
 *The school is built, cleaned and maintained to a high standard.
 *The school has a range of well-equipped facilities such as WASH facilities, libraries, ICT rooms, science labs and playgrounds. These 
facilities are made accessible to all learners equally.
 *Staff consistently follow agreed policies and procedures to keep the school clean and safe.
 *Designated members of staff are trained in first aid and fire safety and everyone knows who they are; first aid equipment and fire 
extinguishers are available. 
 *The security of the school, and the policies and procedures designed to keep the school environment clean, safe and secure and 
accessible, are continually reviewed.
 *Learners’ opinions about the school environment are listened to by a school council where class representatives share ideas with 
teaching staff. 
 *The community supports with creating a clean and safe environment and there are learner environmental clubs that plan projects to 
improve the local environment, and encourage recycling and reducing rubbish.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Clean and Safe Environment for LearningDOMAIN 7 27
A clean and safe environment protects the welfare of learners, particularly the most vulnerable, including girls 
and learners with disabilities, and enables teachers and learners to focus on quality teaching and learning. 
Parents will also prefer to send their children to a school that is accessible, clean, safe and well set up for 
learning. Follow these steps as you make having an accessible, clean and safe environment for learning  
focus for your school. 
 ●Aim to locate the school away from hazards and pollution to make the school site as 
safe as possible. 
 ●Ensure the school building is accessible, has solid floors, secure doors, windows and 
desks, and that the school complies with all legal safety requirements.
 ●Create separate, accessible washrooms for males and females with clean water to 
wash hands.
 ●Highlight the importance of keeping the school clean to all teaching staff and learners.
 ●Provide one classroom for each grade and equip the classroom with age appropriate 
furniture and materials, for example desks should be the correct size. 
 ●Record issues with the building and environment in a log book; prioritise the issues  
to address first.
 ●Control access to the school to keep learners safe.
 ●Timetable daily cleaning procedures to keep the school continuously clean.
 ●Create separate, accessible washrooms with clean and reliable water for both male 
and female learners, and male and female staff. 
 ●Write policies collaboratively with teachers to build a safe and accessible environment 
for learning; include a child protection policy, gender equality policy, anti-discrimination 
and anti-bullying policy and fire safety policy.
 ●Provide a nutritious and varied school menu that supports learners to have a healthy 
and balanced diet.  
 ●Build, clean and maintain the school to a high standard; have well-ventilated classrooms 
and insulated ceilings, if needed; provide electricity in classrooms and staff areas.
 ●Consider how to improve the school building; facilities such as libraries, playgrounds, ICT 
rooms and science labs can be built to enhance the school.  
 ●Ensure staff consistently follow agreed policies and procedures to keep the school 
inclusive, clean and safe. 
 ●Train designated members of staff in first aid and fire safety. Ensure everyone knows who 
the designated people are. Make first aid equipment and fire extinguishers available. 
 ●Constantly review and audit the security of the school, and the policies and procedures 
designed to keep the school environment inclusive, clean, safe and secure. 
 ●Listen to learners’ opinions about the school environment; establish a school council 
where class representatives share ideas with teaching staff. 
 ●Engage with the community to support and create a clean and safe environment and 
set up learner environmental clubs to plan projects to improve the local environment,  
and to encourage recycling and reducing rubbish.Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: 
DOMAIN 7 Clean and Safe Environment for Learning28
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To recruit the best possible teachers for your school, advertise positions widely and internally, and have a clear  
list of requirements for candidates. Think about gender equality as well as disbility inclusion in the process. 
Provide incentives for candidates such as an induction programme for newly qualified teachers, an equitable 
career ladder structure that shows how teachers can progress at your school, as well as a salary scale that 
shows pay increases for increased responsibilities. When interviewing prospective teachers, have them teach  
an observed lesson and involve multiple members of staff to review the candidates. Finally, before appointing,  
check if all applicants are qualified, have good references from previous employers, and pass any nationally 
required criminal record checks.
 *Appointment of teachers is through known candidates or contacts and not necessarily the best qualified person for the job. 
 *There is no salary scale, incentives or promotion ladder. 
 *No criteria have been developed for selection of new teachers.
 *New teachers do not have an induction process to learn about the school. 
 *A fair recruitment process is being used that includes background checks on qualifications and references. 
 *Job advertisements include a clear list of requirements, job description and terms of employment.
 *Recruitment takes place internally, with appointments fairly offered to all qualified candidates.
 *There is an induction programme for new teachers.
 *Candidates are observed teaching a lesson as part of the recruitment process.
 *Safe and inclusive recruitment practices are in use and key policies are discussed with new teachers.
 *A career ladder structure is in place, showing staff how their career could progress at the school.
 *Job descriptions are written for all existing and new roles at the school.
 *The school has a salary scale that shows the increments for increased responsibilities, this is published internally to act as an incentive for staff. 
 *There is a process to help underperforming teachers to improve or to move on.
 *There is a multi-stage recruitment process that includes a lesson observation and reviews of candidate’s portfolios. 
 *Multiple senior school staff interview new candidates; school governors are included on the interview panel for senior appointments. 
 *The school has a recruitment policy that clearly describes the recruitment process.
 *The recruitment process is continuously evaluated and improved based on internal reviews and feedback from candidates.
 *Feedback is given to unsuccessful candidates.
 *A succession plan for key roles in the school is in place and has identified potential new leaders who can replace staff who leave. 
 *The performance of teachers new to the school is reviewed within their first three months and support is provided where needed. 
 *Exit interviews are held with staff who are leaving to learn from their experiences.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Teacher RecruitmentDOMAIN 829Well qualified and able teaching staff make significant impacts on the learning outcomes of learners. 
Competent and qualified teachers are one of the main reasons why parents choose to send their child 
to a school and are therefore crucial for marketing your school. Follow these steps as you make teacher 
recruitment a focus for your school.
 ●Develop and implement a fair recruitment process, including background checks  
on qualifications and references. 
 ●Create job advertisements that include a list of requirements a clear job description  
and terms of employment. 
 ●Ensure recruitment also takes place internally, with appointments fairly offered to  
all qualified candidates. 
 ●Set up an induction programme for new teachers.
 ●Observe candidates teach a lesson as part of the recruitment process. 
 ●Enact safer and inclusive recruitment practices; discuss key policies and inclusion 
practices with new teachers.
 ●Develop a career ladder structure to show teaching staff how their career could 
progress at the school. 
 ●Create job descriptions for all existing and new roles at the school. 
 ●Introduce a salary scale with increments for increased responsibility; publish  
internally to act as an incentive. 
 ●Establish a process to help underperforming teachers to improve or to move on.
 ●Implement a multi-stage recruitment process that includes lesson observation and 
portfolios of candidates. 
 ●Involve multiple school senior staff to interview new candidates; include school governors 
on the interview panel for senior appointments. 
 ●Write a recruitment policy that describes the refined recruitment process. 
 ●Continuously evaluate and improve the recruitment process using reviews and 
suggestions from candidates. 
 ●Offer feedback to unsuccessful candidates 
 ●Build a succession plan for key roles in the school by identifying new leaders to replace 
staff who leave.  
 ●Monitor the performance of newly recruited teachers in the school within the first three 
months to  provide support where needed.
 ●Hold an exit interview as part of the recruitment policy to enable the school to learn from 
staff who are on their way out.
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 8 Teacher Recruitment  30
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To effectively manage your school finances, create a business plan and a yearly operating budget. Document 
income and expenditure, and review figures each month to ensure spending is not exceeding the budget. 
Have trained staff to keep accurate financial records and publish accounts yearly. Involve the Board of 
Governors, which includes both men and women, in overseeing school finances. Finally, create a financial 
management policy and an anti-bribery and corruption policy to ensure good financial management.
 *School financial records are incomplete or not recorded in a systematic way.
 *School has no annual budget and does not produce annual accounts.
 *No financial management policy is in place.
 *Only the school administrator has financial management skills.
 *The school has a one year business plan and an operating budget.
 *Basic monetary records are kept, including a cash book and school fees records which are reviewed monthly by the school leader.
 *The school has a financial management policy and all staff are aware of how money is managed within the school.
 *A statement of accounts is published at the end of the financial year.
 *A three-year business plan has been developed and approved by senior leadership team.
 *An annual budget for the next three years has been developed with a working group and has been signed off by the senior  
leadership team.
 *Staff are trained on the contents of the financial management policy; responsibility for its implementation is delegated to the  
senior leadership team.
 *The financial management policy is reviewed annually.
 *Financial controls to ensure accurate and ethical financial management are implemented.
 *The school finances and budget are compared monthly; corrective action is taken if issues arise.
 *Financial oversight is delegated to the Board of Governors. 
 *A gender and disability-sensitive budget has been developed for the next three years and is used to inform activities and annual planning.
 *A trained accountant is hired to be in charge of book-keeping at school.
 *The Board of Governors review the accounts and budget every year and sign them off.
 *The school has an anti-bribery and corruption policy that is shared with staff and governors.
 *All relevant staff members get on-going financial management training.  
 *The financial management policy and accounts are discussed with the Parent and Teacher Association through annual finance meetings.
 *An accounting firm is appointed to carry out an independent inspection of annual accounts.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Finance and Business ManagementDOMAIN 9 31Good financial management is crucial for the continued running of schools. Budgets must be made to ensure 
schools can meet their expenses, including paying staff regularly. Follow these steps as you make financial 
and business management a focus for your school. 
 ●Compile a one-year business plan and operating budget for the school.
 ●Ensure basic monetary records are kept, including a cash book and school fees 
records which should be reviewed monthly by the school leader.
 ●Write or adapt a financial management policy and ensure all staff are aware of  
how money is managed within the school. 
 ●Publish a statement of accounts at the end of the financial year.
 ●Develop a three-year business plan approved by senior leadership.
 ●Produce an annual budget for the next three years with a working group. This 
should be signed off by leaders. 
 ●Train staff on the contents of the financial management policy, and delegate 
responsibility for its implementation to the school leadership team.
 ●Review the financial management policy annually. 
 ●Implement financial controls to ensure accurate and ethical financial management. 
 ●Compare the school finances and budget monthly; take corrective action if  
issues arise.
 ●Delegate financial oversight to the Board of Governors. 
 ●Develop a three-year gender and disability sensitive budget to inform activities and 
annual planning.
 ●Hire a trained accountant to be in charge of book-keeping at your school.
 ●Ensure Board of Governors review accounts and budget every year and sign them off.
 ●Write or adapt an anti-bribery and corruption policy; share this policy with staff  
and governors. 
 ●Ensure that all relevant staff members get on-going financial management training.  
 ●Discuss the financial management policy and accounts with the Parent and Teacher 
Association through annual finance meetings.
 ●Identify an accounting firm to carry out an independent inspection of annual accounts.
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 9 Finance and Business Management32
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To effectively market and brand a school, begin by identifying the school’s strengths - what differentiates it from 
the local competition - and combine this with market research to create a marketing strategy. Target marketing 
at existing parents and prospective parents and hold events that enable members of the community to visit 
the school. Develop the school’s brand through sharing the school’s mission, vision and values statement, 
its academic successes, its learner profile, any branded items such as school uniform, and its promotion of 
education for all learners, including girls and learners with disabilities.
 *The school is not well known in the local community. 
 *The school does not have a marketing strategy to support retention and enrolment of new and existing learners.
 *The school could be more welcoming for visitors. 
 *There is no mission, vision and values statement for the school.
 *The school’s strengths and differentiating factors in comparison to other schools in the community have been identified.
 *The school has an inviting and inclusive environment for learners and parents, and is known for being welcoming to the  
wider community.
 *There are written mission, vision and values statements that are displayed around the school and these are shared  
regularly with the larger school community, especially parents.
 *The school has researched the purpose and benefits of a Learner Profile for guiding learning goals, supporting school  
culture and developing the school’s brand.
 *Developing good relationships with parents through regular communication about the school’s activities and their child’s progress is a priority.
 *Market research is conducted to understand the characteristics of the market (size, competitors, price points, marketing strategies) and  
is used to inform your school’s marketing strategies.
 *The school has a budget for marketing and branding. 
 *The school has a marketing plan, based on the school’s marketing budget, that highlights its differentiating factors that is shared with  
the school and local community.
 *The school brand is enhanced by branded goods such as branded uniforms, school bags and exercise books.
 *A Learner Profile has been written for the school.
 *The school’s Learner Profile and its benefits are shared with parents and school community.
 *Characteristics of the Learner Profile are displayed around the school through posters and writing made by learners and teaching staff.
 *Open days are held for current and prospective parents where the school’s best features are promoted including the quality of teaching 
and academic successes.  
 *Dedicated members of staff work on marketing and recruitment of learners.
 *All members of staff know the schools marketing approach so that they can effectively deliver the marketing message.
 *Local media and social media are used to showcase school successes and events.
 *The school has a website that is used to promote the school. 
 *The school’s marketing plan and budget are reviewed annually.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Marketing and BrandingDOMAIN 10 33
Successfully marketing and branding a school is vital for ensuring the school maintains learners and  
attracts new learners. Effective marketing can increase a school’s reputation. Follow these steps as  
you make marketing and branding a focus for your school.
 ●Identify your school’s strengths and differentiating factors in comparison to other 
schools in the community.  
 ●Create an inviting and inclusive environment for learners and parents that is known 
for being welcoming to the wider community. 
 ●Write the school’s mission, vision and values statements. Display values visibly 
around the school and share them regularly with the larger school community,  
especially parents. 
 ●Research the purpose and benefits of the Learner Profile for guiding learning 
goals, supporting school culture and developing the school’s brand; study several 
examples of Learner Profiles.
 ●Prioritise developing good relationships with parents through regular communication 
about the school’s activities and their child’s progress.
 ●Conduct market research to understand the characteristics of the market (size, 
competitors, price points, marketing strategies) and use this to inform your school’s 
marketing strategies.
 ●Set a budget for marketing and branding of the school. 
 ●Develop a marketing plan, based on the school’s marketing budget and differentiating 
factors and share it with the school and local community. 
 ●Enhance the school brand with branded goods such as branded uniforms, school 
bags and exercise books. 
 ●Adapt or write a Learner Profile for the school; limit the Learner Profile to 5 to 10 
main characteristics.
 ●Share the school’s Learner Profile and its benefits with parents and the school community.
 ●Display characteristics from the Learner Profile around the school through posters and 
writing made by learners and teaching staff.
 ●Hold open days for current and prospective parents where the school’s best features 
are promoted including the quality of teaching and academic achievements.  
 ●Dedicate members of staff to work on marketing and recruitment of learners. 
 ●Inform all members of staff of the marketing approach so that they can effectively deliver 
the marketing message. 
 ●Use local media and social media to showcase school successes and events.
 ●Create a website that can be used to promote your school. 
 ●Review the schools marketing plan and budget annually.Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 10 Marketing and Branding34
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:The leadership of the school should be clearly defined with a senior leadership team, subject leaders and 
departments to support school operations. A governing body should be incorporated into the leadership of 
the school. A range of school governing body members with a range of skills should be appointed to support 
and hold the school leader accountable. School governing body members should also play a role in the wider 
life of the school and be involved  in school development planning along with other members of the school 
community. Both men and women should be represented in school leadership and governance roles. A School 
Development Plan should be written with a clear focus on improving particular target areas within the school.
 *The proprietor or head teacher is not supported by advisors or a Board of Governors.
 *There is no clear leadership structure in the school.
 *Areas for school improvement have not been clearly identified.
 *The school does not have a written School Development Plan.
 *The school has at least one advisor with experience in education, management and financial administration who assists the proprietor. 
 *Advisors source support from outside organisations, individuals and groups that can benefit the school.
 *There is a clear leadership structure within both teaching and administrative staff; for example, head and deputy head teacher roles, 
subject coordinators and early childhood coordinator. 
 *Areas to be a focus for school development have been identified.
 *A governing body has been formed with governors who are representative and have a range of skills.
 *Governing body members have received training on their role and visit the school so that they know it well.
 *Governing body members are involved in school events and encourage parents to become more involved with the running of the school.
 *Regular governing body meetings are held where school leaders and the governing body work collectively to develop a vision for the 
school, improve academic results, check finances and conduct school development planning.
 *A one year School Development Plan has been written.
 *Support structures such as departments of admissions, examinations and curriculum are used to manage the school.
 *There are written rules and responsibilities for the governing body including requirements for those eligible to join. School governing body 
members know their legal and statutory requirements.
 *Governing body members, as school ambassadors, have a full understanding of the views and needs of learners, teaching staff, parents, 
carers and the local community.
 *Sub-committees of the governing body are formed where governors with particular expertise meet. 
 *The governing body hold school leaders accountable for educational, financial and operational performance, ensuring money is well-spent. 
School leaders present to governors at meetings.
 *A Multi-Stakeholder Team (MST), representing views from different groups is formed to develop and implement the School Development Plan.
 *A three-year School Development Plan has been created and shared with the school community.
 *There is continued collaboration between leaders and teachers to further develop school aims, vision and curriculum.
 *There is an organised staff structure with staff being paid as per responsibility. LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4School Leadership and GovernanceDOMAIN 1135Effective, representative leadership and governance are vital for a school to maintain its high standards and to 
improve further. Follow these steps as you make school leadership and governance a focus for your school.  
 ●Identify at least one advisor who has some experience in education, management 
and financial administration to assist the proprietor. 
 ●Encourage advisors to source support from outside organisations, individuals and 
groups that can benefit the school. 
 ●Ensure there is a clear leadership structure within both teaching and administrative 
staff; for example, head and deputy head teacher roles, subject coordinators etc.
 ●Identify areas within the school to become the development focus.
 ●Invite advisors who have a range of skills, such as an educationalist, accountant, 
lawyer and an entrepreneur to become school governing body members and form 
the governing body. 
 ●Train governoring body members to be able to carry out their responsibilities 
effectively and conduct regular school visits.
 ●Ensure governing body members are involved in school events and are encouraging 
parents to become more involved with the running of the school.
 ●Hold regular governing body meetings where school leaders and the governing body 
work collectively to develop a vision for the school, improve academic results, check 
finances and conduct school development planning. 
 ●Develop a one-year School Development Plan.
 ●Create support structures such as departments of admissions, examinations and 
curriculum to manage the school.
 ●Write the rules and responsibilities for the governing body and the requirements for 
those eligible to join. Ensure the school governing body members know their legal 
and statutory requirements. 
 ●Ensure school governing body members, as school ambassadors, have a full 
understanding of the views and needs of learners, teaching staff, parents, carers and 
the local community.
 ●Create sub-committees of the governing body where governors with particular 
expertise meet. 
 ●Ensure the governing body hold school leaders accountable for educational, financial 
and operational performance, ensuring money is well-spent. School leaders should 
present to governors at meetings.
 ●Form a Multi-Stakeholder Team (MST), representing views from different groups, to 
develop and implement the School Development Plan. 
 ●Create a three-year School Development Plan and share with the school community. 
 ●Ensure continued collaboration between leaders and teachers to further develop 
school aims, vision and curriculum. 
 ●Implement an organised staff structure with staff being paid as per responsibility.
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 11 School Leadership and Governance36
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To develop and oversee the performance of teachers, monitor teachers’ lesson plans and hold regular  
classroom observations. Have a set of teaching standards that teachers’ performance is measured against 
and have teaching staff develop a portfolio of evidence to show how they are meeting these standards. 
Introduce an appraisal system where teachers are set targets and are given the chance to discuss their 
professional development. Monitor teacher adherence to all safeguarding and child protection policies. 
Provide equal access to regular professional development for teachers and link this where applicable to  
areas requiring improvement in the School Development Plan.
 *Teachers are often absent in classrooms.
 *Expected standards for teaching have not been set. 
 *Lesson plans are rarely monitored by the senior leadership team.
 *Teachers’ professional development is not planned.
 *Teachers are physically present in the classrooms during teaching time.
 *There are clear and high expectations of quality teaching in your school.
 *Regular monitoring of teacher lesson plans is timetabled by the school leadership team.
 *Teachers have professional development plans with clear targets, for example improving subject knowledge.
 *Regular professional development training aimed at improving teaching practice is timetabled.
 *Teachers have opportunities to work together to discuss lesson plans, resources and approaches to teaching and learning.  
 *Teaching standards are introduced as part of a school wide appraisal process.
 *Regular lesson observations of all teaching staff are timetabled by the senior leadership team.
 *A standard lesson observation form is used for all observed lessons.
 *Teachers regularly reflect on their practice to ensure they are accountable for the learning of their learners.
 *All staff, including volunteer teachers and assistants are provided with free professional development.
 *All teachers create their own portfolio of evidence to show how they meet professional teaching standards. 
 *Teacher appraisal targets are reviewed annually and linked to priority areas in the School Development Plan.
 *School based professional development sessions are matched to priority areas identified within the School Development Plan.
 *Teachers are trained on any changes to the national curriculum; including their language skills, should the language of instruction change. 
 *Teachers have expert knowledge and show passion for their subject.  
 *The school has a mentoring process to enable all teachers to support each other and share best practice. 
 *Learner performance data is used to identify areas of teaching that require improvement.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Teacher Development and OversightDOMAIN 12 37Teachers are the most important reason for the success of learners. It is therefore important that teacher 
performance is developed and monitored. Follow these steps as you make teacher development and  
oversight a focus for your school. 
 ●Ensure teachers are physically present in the classrooms during teaching time.
 ●Set clear and high expectations of quality teaching in your school. 
 ●Timetable for regular monitoring of teacher lesson plans.  
 ●Introduce professional development plans for teachers with clear targets, for 
example improving subject knowledge. 
 ●Timetable regular professional development training aimed at improving  
teaching practice. 
 ●Provide opportunities for teachers to work together to discuss lesson plans, resources 
and approaches to teaching and learning.  
 ●Introduce teaching standards as part of a school wide appraisal process.
 ●Design or implement a standard lesson observation form to use for all lessons observed 
at your school.
 ●Timetable regular lesson observations of all teaching staff by the senior leadership team. 
 ●Ensure teachers know they are accountable for the learning of their learners and 
reflect on their practice. 
 ●Provide all staff, including volunteer teachers and assistants, with free  
professional development. 
 ●Ensure all teachers create their own portfolio of evidence to show how they meet 
professional teaching standards.  
 ●Link teacher appraisal targets to areas requiring improvement in the School 
Development Plan; review these targets annually.  
 ●Match school based professional development sessions to priority areas identified 
within the School Development Plan. 
 ●Train teachers on any changes to the national curriculum; teacher language skills will 
need to be supported if the language of instruction changes. 
 ●Ensure teachers have expert knowledge and show passion for their subject.  
 ●Create a mentoring process to enable all teachers to support each other and share 
best practice. 
 ●Use learner performance data to identify areas of teaching that require improvement.Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 12 Teacher Development and Oversight3803
38TEACHING 
& LEARNING
DOMAIN 13 : Teaching and Learning Resources
DOMAIN 14 : Lesson Planning and Delivery
DOMAIN 15 : Assessment of Learning
DOMAIN 16 : Learner-Centred Teaching  
                         and Learning Methods
DOMAIN 17 : School Curriculum
DOMAIN 18 : Early Childhood Education 39TEACHING 
& LEARNING
DOMAIN 13 : Teaching and Learning Resources
DOMAIN 14 : Lesson Planning and Delivery
DOMAIN 15 : Assessment of Learning
DOMAIN 16 : Learner-Centred Teaching  
                         and Learning Methods
DOMAIN 17 : School Curriculum
DOMAIN 18 : Early Childhood Education 
40
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To support teaching and learning, ensure all learners have basic resources such as exercise books, pens and 
pencils and teachers have chalk and blackboards. Beyond this, encourage teachers to create resources for their 
classroom, set standards for displays in classrooms and use the whole school site, including outdoor areas, 
as a resource for learning. Resources should be accessible to all learners, and promote gender and disability 
inclusion. Allocate budgets for more advanced resources, such as science and ICT equipment, and provide 
resources for extra-curricular activities, which are equally accessible to all learners.
 *The teacher is the main and sometimes only resource.
 *Classrooms are very basic. 
 *Learners have few or no learning resources.  
 *Available resources are not always age appropriate or accessible for learners.
 *Learners have pens, pencils and exercise books.
 *Classrooms are equipped with presentation boards (blackboards or whiteboards).
 *Teachers are supported to create their own teaching and learning resources. 
 *Desks and seats are provided that are age and disability-appropriate for learners.
 *Learners have all the necessary textbooks free from gender and disability stereotypes and conflict related issues.    
 *Physical resources, such as counters, to enable different types of learning are provided.  
 *Classrooms are used flexibly by changing the layout to allow different types of learning.   
 *Teachers share resources, including schemes of work; computers and photocopiers are available to enable sharing.  
 *The school has secure storage for resources. 
 *A display policy sets the standards for displays across the school.
 *Enough accessible resources are available for learners to work independently on learner-centred tasks, such as project work.
 *Internet access is available for teachers and learners to access online learning resources and materials.
 *A suite of tablets or laptops are used to support teaching and learning across all subjects. 
 *The school has space and resources for a wide range of timetabled extra-curricular activities. 
 *Subject leaders have budgets to purchase specialist resources. 
 *Teachers are experts at using specialist equipment such as science laboratory equipment. 
 *The whole school site is used effectively for learning, including outside areas. 
 *Resources are evaluated to ensure they are best value for money, effective for learning and promote gender equality and disability inclusion.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Teaching and Learning ResourcesDOMAIN 13 41
Teaching and learning resources are essential for good learning to take place in your school. A school that is 
well equipped with gender-balanced and disability-inclusive resources provides a selling point for prospective 
parents. Follow these steps as you make teaching and learning resources a focus for your school.
 ●Ensure learners have the resources needed to learn including pens, pencils and 
exercise books.
 ●Provide presentation boards (blackboards or whiteboards) for teachers to use when 
delivering lessons. 
 ●Support teachers to create teaching and learning resources for their class. 
 ●Provide desks and seating that are age or disability-appropriate to learners.
 ●Ensure learners have all the necessary textbooks free from gender and disability 
stereotypes and conflict related issues.
 ●Provide physical resources, such as counters, to enable different types of learning, 
including active learning. 
 ●Use the classroom flexibly, changing the layout, to allow different types of learning.   
 ●Encourage teachers to share resources including schemes of work; provide  
computers and photocopiers to enable sharing.  
 ●Buy and build secure storage for school resources. 
 ●Write a display policy to establish set standards for displays across the school;  
ensure displays are both useful and well presented.
 ●Provide enough accessible resources for learners to work independently  
on learner-centred tasks, such as project work. 
 ●Provide safe internet access so teachers and learners can access online  
learning resources and materials. 
 ●Invest in a suite of tablets or laptops to be used to support teaching and  
learning across all subjects. 
 ●Provide accessible space and resources for a wide range of timetabled  
extra-curricular activities. 
 ●Provide subject leaders with budgets to buy specialist resources; initiate a  
purchasing system at your school.
 ●Ensure teachers are experts at using specialist equipment such as that in  
a science laboratory.   
 ●Use the whole school site to support learning; include outside areas,  
particularly for Early Years children. 
 ●Evaluate resources to ensure they are effective for learning and promote  
gender equality and disability inclusion.
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 13 Teaching and Learning Resources42
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To plan effective lessons, lesson plan templates should be used by all teachers. Teachers should plan together 
and share ideas on effective teaching and learning. Additionally, staff meetings should provide teachers with  
ideas on how to effectively plan, structure and differentiate lessons so that all learners can learn. Mentor teachers 
can provide further support for less experienced teachers. A system for monitoring teachers’ lesson plans should  
be in place which should include checking that the teachers are planning effective sequences of lessons. Finally, 
schemes of work should be used and developed to support with unit and termly planning. 
 *There is no consistent approach to using lesson plans across the school. 
 *Teachers often teach without having a lesson plan. 
 *Teachers lack awareness on the importance of lesson planning. 
 *Teachers rarely work together to plan lessons.
 *A standard lesson plan template is in use by teachers across the school.
 *Teachers know how to use the schools lesson plan template.
 *Teachers regularly use a lesson plan to inform their classroom teaching.
 *Teachers plan together to share ideas and lesson plans where possible.
 *All teachers are using the standard template to produce plans for every lesson.
 *Information from assessments is used when designing lesson plans.
 *Different activities are planned to ensure learner engagement and participation in the classroom, including differentiation, these are 
clearly written within lesson plans.
 *Teachers are informed of researched best practice for lesson plan structures, including the use of learning objectives.
 *A regular routine is established for colleagues to work collaboratively when planning lessons, making decisions on assessment and 
best classroom practices.
 *Schemes of work from outside sources are used, provided they are specific to the needs of the school.  
Teachers are encouraged to adapt schemes of work as they grow in professional confidence.
 *Lessons are planned to meet the diverse needs of learners by representing information in different ways and by using different 
strategies to engage learners.
 *Schemes of work are created internally, ensuring curriculum coverage and innovation; the internet is used to source ideas and content. 
 *A variety of strategies and resources is included in schemes of work to support diverse learning needs and levels of attainment.  
 *Resources from the internet are used to enhance the lesson plans.  
 *Lesson plans are sequenced appropriately, closely following the curriculum and schemes of work.  
 *Teachers are flexible and ready to adapt lesson plans according to learners’ diverse needs.
 *Teachers take time to reflect on the effectiveness of lessons, and how this impacts future planning and teaching.
 *The school has mentor teachers who are able to support and guide teachers in developing lesson plans.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Lesson Planning and DeliveryDOMAIN 14 43Planning and delivering consistently good lessons is crucial for all learners to make good academic progress. 
Follow these steps as you make lesson planning and delivery a focus for your school. 
 ●Create (or introduce) a standard lesson plan template to be shared with all  
teaching staff to ensure consistency.  
 ●Train teachers on how to use the lesson plan template.  
 ●Ensure teachers regularly use a lesson plan to inform classroom teaching  
and activities.  
 ●Encourage teachers to plan together where possible and to share lesson plans.
 ●Ensure all teachers are using the standard template to produce plans for every lesson.  
 ●Use information from assessments when designing lesson plans. 
 ●Plan activities to ensure all learners engagement and participation in the classroom, 
including differentiation, make these clear within lesson plans.  
 ●Inform teachers of researched best practice for lesson plan structures, including the 
use of learning objectives.  
 ●Develop a regular routine for colleagues to work collaboratively when planning 
lessons, making decisions on assessment and best classroom practices.  
 ●Collect schemes of work from outside sources, ensuring they are specific to the 
needs of the school; encourage teachers to adapt schemes of work as they grow  
in professional confidence. 
 ●Explore new ways of structuring lessons to meet the diverse needs of learners, using a 
range of approaches to represent information and engage learners. 
 ●Create schemes of work internally, ensuring curriculum coverage and innovation; use the 
internet to source ideas and content. 
 ●Sequence lesson plans appropriately, closely following the curriculum and schemes  
of work.  
 ●Include a variety of inclusive strategies and resources in schemes of work to support 
different learning needs; differentiate extensively in lesson activities. 
 ●Use resources from the internet to enhance the lesson plans.  
 ●Encourage flexibility and readiness to adapt lesson plans according to learners’  
diverse needs.  
 ●Encourage teachers to take time to reflect on the effectiveness of lessons, and how  
this impacts future planning and teaching.
 ●Establish mentor teachers who are able to support and guide teachers in developing 
lesson plans.   Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: 
DOMAIN 14 Lesson Planning and Delivery44
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To effectively assess learning, ensure all teaching staff are aware of the age-related performance expectations 
for the learners that they teach and the importance of applying these expectations consistently with boys and 
girls. Use a range of formative assessment methods to check learners’ understanding and whether they are 
meeting learning objectives. Ensure marking is uniform by introducing a marking code. Provide effective 
feedback to learners, highlighting what they did well and what they could improve on. Use examples of 
assessed work, including samples from learners who are boys, girls and learners with special educational 
needs and disabilities (SEND) to moderate teacher assessment across the school. Finally, prepare learners  
for external assessments and analyse assessment data to target improvements across the school.
 *The school curriculum does not clearly indicate the progress learners should make each year. 
 *The purpose of assessment and the need to deliver assessment practices fairly and reliably is not understood by all. 
 *Marking of work by teachers is inconsistent. 
 *Not all learners are well prepared for external assessments.
 *The national curriculum is used to establish learner expectations for assessment in each subject at every grade level within the  
school curriculum.
 *Teachers are trained on the purpose of assessment and are aware of the need to use them fairly and reliably and on the need to  
give feedback on assessment to all learners. 
 *The school has a marking code to ensure consistency of marking. 
 *All leaners are prepared for external assessments.
 *A range of formative assessment methods are implemented in school.
 *The use of formative and summative assessment methods are planned for each grade.
 *Assessment data is used to ensure future lessons meet the needs of all learners. 
 *Feedback given to learners is reviewed to make sure it is effective.
 *Examples of learners work has been collected and used to moderate assessments. 
 *The school has a marking policy that provides clear guidance on marking expectations across the school.
 *A whole school assessment policy is in place and teachers are trained to follow the methods.
 *Data on learner performance is collected to monitor learners’ performance against age-related expectations.
 *A school-wide moderation process is used to ensure learners are meeting stated performance standards and assessments are 
reliable and valid. 
 *The school uses high quality assessment tools.
 *External and internal assessments are held to prepare learners for exams and the results are used to target support for individual learners.
 *Exam results are analysed to identify gaps in learners’ knowledge and to adapt planning and teaching where necessary.
 *The impact of assessment on the workload and motivation of teachers is considered.
 *Key statements from the national curriculum are used to identify what learners should be able to do by the end of each grade; they 
form the standard for assessment.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Assessment of LearningDOMAIN 15 45
Effective assessment of learning enables teachers to provide good feedback to learners and differentiate  
their teaching to meet the needs of their learners. At a whole school level, assessment results, disaggregated  
by gender, can be used to target improvements in particular areas of the curriculum. Follow these steps as  
you make assessment of learning a focus for your school. 
 ●Use the national curriculum as guidance to establish learner expectations for 
assessment in each subject at every grade level within the school curriculum. 
 ●Train teachers so they are clear on the purpose of assessment and are aware  
of the need to use assessment methods fairly and reliably and on the need to  
give feedback on assessment to all learners. 
 ●Ensure consistency of marking by creating a whole school marking code.  
 ●Prepare learners for external assessments; make learners aware of their 
responsibility for their own learning.
 ●Research and choose a range of formative assessment methods to  
implement in school. 
 ●Plan when formative and summative assessments are used in each grade. 
 ●Use assessment data to ensure future planned lessons meet the needs  
of all learners. 
 ●Review the feedback given to learners to ensure it is effective.
 ●Collect examples of learners’ work and use these to moderate assessments. 
 ●Develop a marking policy to provide clear guidance on marking expectations  
across the school.
 ●Develop a detailed whole school assessment policy and ensure teachers are trained 
and following the methods in the policy. 
 ●Collect and record data (separated by gender) on learners’ learning so that their 
progress can be compared and tracked against age-related expectations; consider 
how this data will be used in planning and improving learner outcomes.  
 ●Have a school-wide moderation process to all, ensure learners are meeting stated 
performance standards and assessments are reliable and valid. 
 ●Use and develop high quality assessment tools; consult with teachers about  
their usefulness. 
 ●Hold mock and internal assessments to prepare learners for exams and use mock 
results to target support for individual learners. 
 ●Analyse exam results to identify gaps in learners’ knowledge; adapt planning and 
teaching where necessary. 
 ●Consider the impact of assessment on the workload and motivation of teachers. 
 ●Select key statements from the national curriculum to identify what learners should  
be able to do by the end of each grade; use these as the standard for assessment.
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 15 Assessment of Learning46
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To develop a learner-centred approach to teaching and learning, change the focus of lessons from the teacher 
being the most important person to focusing on the learners. Do this by sharing learning objectives so learners 
know what they should achieve in each lesson, and give learners time to assess their learning. Reduce the  
amount of time teachers talk and use questions effectively to encourage all learners to think, talk and share  
their ideas with their classmates. Use gender-balanced group work and project work to increase learner 
collaboration and independence. Finally, adapt lessons to meet the diverse needs of all learners by including 
different strategies to engage all learners and differentiating lessons.
 *Teaching is mainly focused on teachers talking and learners listening.
 *Learners are not always clear about what they are learning and why they are learning it.
 *Learners have limited time to talk and learn from each other. 
 *Teachers are not using questions effectively to engage learners.
 *Teachers share clear learning objectives for every lesson so learners know what they should achieve.
 *Teachers use teaching techniques and inclusive strategies that get learners to interact and talk with each other.
 *Teachers use a range of questioning techniques to engage all learners.
 *Project work is used in classrooms.
 *Teacher talk is reduced by using a range of teaching methods and independent learning activities.
 *Individual learning resources are available to support particular learning activities; for example, counters for maths learning.   
 *Teachers plan for the needs of all learners by using a range of activities that match learners’ attainment.
 *The classroom layout is arranged to support different teaching methods and to enable group work.
 *Learners understanding is consolidated through revisiting concepts and the use of homework.
 *Teachers to use questioning to check learner’s prior knowledge and to assess understanding during and at the end of a lesson to guide 
further planning and teaching.
 *Learners have opportunities to take ownership of their own learning.
 *ICT equipment is used to enable collaborative work amongst groups of learners.
 * Lessons are planned that use a range of strategies to meet the needs of all learners, including those with SEND.
 *Self and peer assessment are used so learners can see if they have met the learning objectives in lessons. 
 *Questioning is used to encourage critical thinking. 
 *Learners have time to explore key curriculum concepts in depth to consolidate their learning and to demonstrate their mastery of concepts.
 *There is a school plan for extra learning reinforcement to ensure that all learners are supported to develop their learning skills and  
improve performance.
 *Specialist equipment is used to further learner-centred teaching and learning such as science experiment materials.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Learner-Centred Teaching and Learning MethodsDOMAIN 16 47
A learner-centred approach develops more engaged learners who achieve more academically and develop 
important life skills. Follow these steps as you make learner-centred teaching and learning methods a focus  
for your school. 
 ●Ensure teachers share clear learning objectives for each lesson so learners know 
what they should achieve.
 ●Use teaching techniques that encourage learners to interact and talk/engage with 
each other.
 ●Use a range of questioning techniques to engage all learners. 
 ●Introduce project work in the classroom as a first step towards learner-centred 
teaching and learning.
 ●Train teachers to use different teaching methods and independent activities to reduce 
the amount of teacher talk.
 ●Have individual learning resources available to support particular learning activities;  
for example, counters for maths learning.   
 ●Start planning for the diverse needs of all learners by using differentiated and inclusive 
activities that match learners’ attainment.
 ●Arrange the classroom layout to support different teaching methods and to enable 
group work.
 ●Consolidate learners’ understanding by revisiting concepts and using homework.
 ●Use questioning to check learner’s prior knowledge and to assess understanding 
during and at the end of a lesson to guide further planning and teaching.
 ●Provide opportunities for learners to take ownership of their own learning. 
 ●Incorporate use of computers or tablets to enable collaborative work among groups  
of learners. 
 ●Plan lessons that use a range of strategies to meet the diverse needs of all learners, 
including those with SEND. 
 ●Use self and peer assessment so learners can see how they meet the learning 
objectives of the lesson.
 ●Use questions to encourage critical thinking; start questions with who, what, when,  
why and how. 
 ●Give learners time to explore key curriculum concepts in depth to consolidate their 
learning and to demonstrate their mastery of concepts.
 ●Make a school plan for extra learning reinforcement to ensure that all learners are 
supported to develop their learning skills and improve performance.
 ●Use specialist learning equipment such as science and ICT equipment to enable 
further learner-centred learning. 
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 16 Learner-Centred Teaching and Learning Methods48
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To develop an effective curriculum, ensure that the taught content relates to the lives and experiences of all 
learners. Learners should be taught skills as well as knowledge. All subjects or learning areas should be  
seen as equally important for boys and girls, including those with special educational needs and disabilities,  
and the curriculum should be integrated with links made between subjects. ICT should be used to support  
learning across all subjects or learning areas. Learners’ interests should be encouraged through a range of  
extra-curricular activities, and there should be a careers programme – including the representation of  
women, men and people with disabilities in a variety of careers – for learners to consider their futures.
 *The School curriculum focuses mostly on academic content and not information and experiences that relate to learners’ lives and the 
world of work. 
 *No links are made between the different subjects or learning areas in the curriculum.
 *Careers and further education are not part of the curriculum. 
 *Learners are not offered extra-curricular activities.  
 *Both academic content and information and experiences that relate to learners’ lives and the world of work are included in the  
school curriculum. 
 *A committee of teachers has identified links between subjects or learning areas in the school curriculum as a first step towards an 
integrated curriculum. 
 *Learners who show an interest in careers and Higher Education are able to ask for advice from experienced staff.  
 *Extra-curricular activities are run areas such as sport, culture, community, enterprise and citizenship.
 *Teaching of the curriculum includes knowledge, concepts, skills, values and attitudes within the school curriculum. 
 *All curriculum subjects or learning areas are treated as being equally important.
 *Links between subjects are used to support an integrated curriculum.
 *A careers guidance programme is in place to promote a range of career pathways; guidance is adapted to create individual support 
for all learners, regardless of ability. 
 *A member of the teaching staff is appointed as the extra-curricular activities coordinator.
 *A timetable for extra-curricular activities shows where and when extra-curricular activities take place.
 *A dedicated member of staff is appointed to be the Careers Guidance Counsellor. 
 *A structured career programme has been developed with the help from the Careers Guidance Counsellor and mentors. The programme 
primarily supports girls, boys, those with special educational needs and disabilities, and those from different backgrounds in their 
final two years.
 *Parents and learners give feedback on the quality of extra-curricular activities.
 *Parents and learners are encouraged to suggest which extra-curricular activities they would like the school to run.
 *Staff meetings are held where teachers are encouraged to challenge and suggest improvements to the school curriculum. 
 *ICT is being incorporated into all subjects or learning areas in the curriculum to support learning objectives.
 *An internal committee of teachers, who teach a range of subjects or learning areas, review the curriculum yearly.    
 *A wide range of resources, including ICT and the internet, are used when carrying out planning that will move the curriculum away from 
relying on textbooks.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4School CurriculumDOMAIN 17 49A broad curriculum that teaches learners skills, provides extra-curricular activities and careers guidance will 
help to develop learners who are well prepared for their future. Follow these steps as you make the school 
curriculum a focus for your school.  
 ●Include both academic content and information and experiences that relate to 
learners’ lives and the world of work in the school curriculum. 
 ●Establish a committee to identify links between subjects or learning areas in the 
school curriculum as a first step towards an integrated curriculum. 
 ●Encourage learners who show an interest in careers and Higher Education to  
ask for advice from experienced staff.  
 ●Introduce extra-curricular activities in some activity areas such as sport, culture, 
community, enterprise and citizenship.
 ●Include the teaching of knowledge, concepts, skills, values and attitudes within the 
school curriculum.
 ●Treat all curriculum subjects or learning areas as being equally important. 
 ●Use links between subjects to support an integrated curriculum. 
 ●Develop a careers guidance programme to promote a range of career pathways; 
adapt guidance to create individual support for all learners, regardless of ability. 
 ●Appoint a member of the teaching staff to be the extra-curricular activities coordinator. 
 ●Create a timetable for extra-curricular activities to show where and when they are 
taking place. 
 ●Appoint a dedicated member of staff to be the Careers Guidance Counsellor. 
 ●Develop a structured career programme with help from the Careers Guidance  
Counsellor and mentors. This programme should primarily support girls, boys,  
those with special educational needs and disabilities and those from different  
backgrounds in their final two years.
 ●Implement a method for parents and learners to give feedback on the quality  
of extra-curricular activities. 
 ●Ask for suggestions from parents and learners about which extra-curricular  
activities they would like the school to run. 
 ●Research and identify how ICT can be incorporated into all subjects or learning  
areas in the curriculum to support learning objectives. 
 ●Hold staff meetings where teachers are encouraged to challenge and suggest 
improvements to the school curriculum. 
 ●Organise an internal committee of teachers who teach a range of subjects or  
learning areas to review the curriculum yearly.  
 ●Use a wide range of resources, including ICT and the internet, when planning  
the curriculum to move further away from relying on textbooks.
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 17 School Curriculum50
Date: Date: Date:School Self-Assessment:To provide an effective early learning experience, early years classes should have their own unique focus. The 
curriculum needs to support all areas of development and be play-based. Classrooms and outdoor spaces 
should be equipped to provide a range of play and learning opportunities for both girls and boys, including those 
with disabilities. Assessment of learners should be continuous and involve all staff in observing, assessing and 
supporting the developmental progress of learners. Screening of learners to identify any challenges and  
disabilities should be done for the purpose of early intervention and referrals for timely mitigation. Finally,  
parents should be closely involved with their child’s learning and continually supported with parent  
empowerment programmes.
 *Classrooms are not set up into learning areas and do not allow for independent play.
 *Observations of learners are infrequent and not regularly recorded.
 *The school day is not structured and lacks good routines that support learners.
 *Planning does not cover all areas of development (cognitive, physical, emotional, social, speech and language).
 *Classrooms have some learning areas set up (e.g., construction corner and reading corner) and some resources for independent 
play, i.e., basic Teaching and Learning Materials (TLMs).
 *Observations to assess learners’ needs take place and the findings are recorded.
 *There is some structure to the school day and routines are established.
 *There is evidence of all areas of development (cognitive, physical, emotional, social, speech and language) being planned for.
 *A variety of safe indoor and outdoor learning areas are set up for playful learning and are changed according to lesson plans.  
E.g., construction corner, reading corner, drawing/writing table, numeracy table.
 *Learners are regularly observed against developmental milestones, and evidence of their progress is recorded using a range  
of age-appropriate methods (e.g. observations and work samples).
 *The school day has a clear, age-appropriate structure and routine that learners clearly understand, and positive behaviour 
management techniques are used consistently.
 *There is evidence of safe indoor and outdoor playful learning for all areas of development.
 *There is a parent programme in place to share knowledge on how to support young children’s learning at home.
 *Teachers have realistic expectations of learners and support their individual needs using a range of techniques.
 *The classroom is resourced and set up to allow for playful learning across all areas of development e.g. construction corner,  
reading corner, drawing/writing table, numeracy table, role-play area, music area.
 *Observations of all areas of development are conducted systematically, evidence of progress is recorded and used to plan next steps.
 *There is a designated Special Needs Education (SNE specialist, who screens and supports learners, makes referrals, and  
liaises with parents and external specialists.
 *Indoor and outdoor learning areas are well-maintained and have a variety of safe and inclusive play-based TLMS.
 *TLMs and lesson plans are safe, gender responsive and disability-inclusive.
 *Planning shows opportunities for child-led, adult-initiated, and adult-led playful learning across all areas of development.
 *Parents are effectively engaged with the ECE programme e.g., through open days, Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) and training workshops.
 *Teachers are flexible with lesson plans and adapt instruction to meet the diverse needs of all learners.LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2Self-Assessment Criteria
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4Early Childhood Education DOMAIN 18 51
Early childhood classrooms are where learners develop and progress the most. When children are healthy, 
safe and learning in their early years, they are better able to reach their full developmental potential. A quality 
early education is crucial to learners’ future success. The early childhood section is also where parents will get 
their first impression of the school. Follow these steps as you make early childhood a focus for your school.
 ●Support teachers to set up classroom into learning areas and provide some basic 
resources for playful learning.
 ●Start making observations to assess learners’ progress and develop an observation 
form to record findings.
 ●Train teachers on how to develop a daily routine and create a timetable to display.
 ●Ensure that long-term and daily lesson plans cover all areas of development: 
cognitive, physical, emotional, social, speech and language
 ●Create safe and inclusive indoor and outdoor learning areas and keep learners 
engaged by regularly changing the activities available.
 ●Ensure that teachers regularly observe learners and record evidence of progress 
against all areas of development.
 ●Ensure that the daily routine is age-appropriate and well-established and supported  
by visual aids. Train teachers on positive behaviour management techniques.
 ●Develop lesson and environment plans to ensure that all learners have opportunities 
to develop holistically.
 ●Develop a parent programme that equips parents with knowledge on quality ECE  
and how they can support their children’s learning.
 ●Ensure teachers understand the developmental stages of learning and how to adapt 
teaching to the diverse needs of all learners.
 ●Ensure that the ECE classroom and outdoor area are well-resourced and have a  
range of playful learning opportunities across all areas of development.
 ●Create a clear system for observations to ensure that they are recorded, tracked  
and used to plan future lessons.
 ●Designate a SNE specialist who has experience in screening learners, making  
referrals and liaising with parents/carers and external specialists.
 ●Develop an environment audit that checks the safety of the indoor and outdoor  
learning environment and TLMs.
 ●Ensure that TLMs and lesson plans are gender-responsive.
 ●Create opportunities for all parents to engage with the ECE programme.
 ●Regularly audit planning to ensure that child-led, adult-initiated, and adult-led playful 
learning opportunities across all areas of child development are planned for.
 ●Train teachers on how to adapt instruction to meet the diverse needs of all learners. 
Follow up training with observations to ensure implementation.
Action Points
2-3 Improving  - As you progress: 1-2 Beginning  - As you start: 
3-4 Excelling  - As you succeed: DOMAIN 18 Early Childhood Education 5252Once you have completed your School Self-Assessment, write the overall levels next to the relevant domain on 
this page. The School Self-Assessment Summary provides a useful overview of your school’s areas of strength 
and areas of greatest need.School Self-Assessment Profile
Domain Overall Level
DOMAIN 13: Teaching and Learning Resources
DOMAIN 14: Lesson Planning and Delivery
DOMAIN 15: Assessment of Learning
DOMAIN 16: Learner-Centred Teaching and Learning
DOMAIN 17: School Curriculum
DOMAIN 18: Early Childhood Education 
NotesTeaching and LearningDOMAIN 1: Behaviour Management
DOMAIN 2: Parent and Community Engagement
DOMAIN 3: Child Protection
DOMAIN 4: Learner Engagement and Welfare
DOMAIN 5: Staff Engagement and Retention
DOMAIN 6: Inclusive EducationSchool Culture
DOMAIN 7: Clean and Safe Environment for Learning
DOMAIN 8: Teacher Recruitment
DOMAIN 9: School Leadership and Governance 
DOMAIN 10: Finance and Business Management
DOMAIN 11: Marketing and Branding
DOMAIN 12: Teacher Development and OversightSchool Management53The School Development Plan (SDP) is a strategic plan to achieve school improvement. It should bring 
together the school’s priorities and outline the main actions the school will take to achieve its stated goals, 
within a specified period of time.
The diagram below shows the best approach to building and implementing a good School Development Plan: 
A plan to improve first depends on a good understanding of existing school practices. These are the starting 
points for any school improvement effort and the baselines against which a school’s progress is measured.
The following steps should be taken to complete the School Self-Assessment:
1. Read the self-assessment criteria outlined within Pathways to Excellence to identify which level your 
school is currently operating at for each domain.
2. Record your school’s level for each domain (levels span from 1 to 4).
3. Be honest and transparent about the level that you choose to ensure that you are able to achieve 
success with your School Development Plan.School Development Plan
The Process
STEP 1:  Complete the School Self-AssessmentSTEP 1
Complete 
the School 
Self-Assessment
Identify 2-4 
Priority DomainsSTEP 2
Create the School 
Development PlanSTEP 3
Consult with the
 Multi-St akeholder
 TeamSTEP 4Implement and 
Monitor the School 
Development PlanSTEP 5Annually 
Review the School 
Development PlanSTEP 654A School Development Plan (SDP) is a strategic plan for improvement.  It should bring together, in a clear and 
simple way, the school priorities (highlighted through the School Self-Assessment) and set out the actions and 
resources needed to achieve these priority goals.
SDPs should be created at the start of the academic school year and should last for at least 1 year, with specific 
priority areas (2-4 priority domains) clearly indicated.
Within the SDP, SMART targets should be used (see below) to ensure the specific actions and activities included in 
the plan are relevant, measurable and can be achieved within the specified timeframe.
SMART TARGETS:No school can focus on improving in all domains at the same time. We therefore strongly recommend that you 
focus on between 2 to 4 domains within your School Development Plan (SDP) per academic year. The domains  
you select will become your goals in the SDP, in other words, they will form the goals you want to achieve in 
your school over the year.
It is useful to reflect on the domains where you have scored the lowest in the School Self-Assessment as these can 
help you to identify the school’s priority development areas. The domains you choose to focus on might strongly  
inter-relate with other areas. Therefore, one approach is to focus on a group of domains that complement each other.
SPECIFIC
S M A R TMEASURABLE ACHIEVABLE RELEVANT TIMELY
What do you want 
to achieve? What  
actions will help 
you to achieve it?How will you  
know when you  
have reached it?Is it in 
your power to  
accomplish it?Are your goals  
linked to your 
self-assessment?When exactly  
do you want to  
accomplish it?
Here is a general overview of how to write a detailed and specific School Development Plan:
 ●DOMAIN - WHAT DOMAIN DID YOU SELECT FOR YOUR SCHOOL DEVELOPMENT PLAN?
Select one of the priority domains selected for improvement (based on the School Self-Assessment).
 ●LEVEL - WHAT LEVEL ARE YOU WORKING TOWARDS?
Indicate what level you are working towards within this domain (e.g., Level 2-3)
 ●ACTION POINTS - WHICH P2E ACTION POINTS WILL HELP YOU PROGRESS?
Within each domain, P2E provides you with a series of action points that will help you transition from one 
level to the next. Find the correct level within your domain (example: transitioning from 2-3) and select the 
most relevant action points for your school (aim for 2 to 3 action points per domain).
 ●IMPLEMENTATION STEPS - WHAT DOES THIS THIS LOOK LIKE IN ACTION IN YOUR SCHOOL?
Here you should list the specific steps that you will take in your school to help achieve the action point. 
Use the guidance in P2E to support you in this process - remember, each action point includes a series of 
recommended implementation steps.
 ●RESPONSIBLE PERSON/S: WHO IS LEADING EACH ACTIVITY?
Include at least one person who will be responsible for each implementation step. It could be one person
(example: The School Leader) or a team (example: the Multi-Stakeholder Team).STEP 2: Identify 2-4 Priority Domains
STEP 3: Create the School Development Plan55 ●MEASURING SUCCESS: HOW WILL YOU MONITOR PROGRESS?
Define how you will measure success. This could be as simple a measure as checking that an activity was 
completed (example: a policy was written) or it could involve monitoring its success or impact (example: 
lesson observations to measure the impact of teacher professional development).
 ●TIMELINE: WHEN WILL EACH IMPLEMENTATION STEP BEGIN AND BE COMPLETED? 
Think about when you want each implementation step to start (ask yourself if it is realistic) and when it should 
be completed. At a minimum, each step should be completed by the end of the academic school year. 
 ●COST AND RESOURCES: DOES IT REQUIRE MONEY OR RESOURCES?
Indicate the resources required (example: financial, human, physical) to achieve each activity. While it is important 
to invest in the SDP, you should try to balance expensive actions (e.g., improving the school infrastructure) with 
actions that mostly require time and effort (e.g., developing a Behaviour Management Policy). 
SCHOOL DEVELOPMENT PLAN EXAMPLE:
See an example of a partially completed School Development Plan below. 
The School Development Plan template is designed to guide you towards using SMART targets and it will help 
you to structure your School Development Plan. It can be found at the end of the booklet.
Effective leadership plays an important role in school improvement. It is important that the school leader consults 
with others to refine and implement the School Development Plan.
One effective strategy is creating a multi-stakeholder team (MST) who are responsible for supporting the creation 
and implementation of the School Development Plan. The MST should be made up of multiple members from the 
school and local community. It is important to have representation from men and women within the MST and provide 
equal opportunities for participation.STEP 4:  Consult with the Multi-Stakeholder Team
School Name:Pathways to Ex cellence (P2E) School Development Plan
DOMAIN ACTION POINTS IMPLEMENTATION S TEPS RESPONSIBLE
PERSON/S:MEASURING
SUCCESSTIMELINE COS T & 
RESOURCES
P2E DOMAIN
(E.G. TEAC HER
RECRUITMENT)Which domain 
did you select?Which P2E action points 
will help you progress?What does this this look like  
in action in your school? Who is leading 
each activity?How will you 
monitor progress?When will each 
implementation 
step begin and 
be completed?Does it require  
money or resources?
Create a clear list of 
consequences for negative behaviour; ensure everyone follows so all learners are treated fairly.Consequences chart in all classes. Senoir leadership team to monitor use of chart during observations. Deputy head to interview learners to check understanding of consequences chart.Working group 
to meet in term 1 and develop a consequences chart by the end of term 1. Consequences chart to be used beginning term 2.Paper , printing and 
laminating cost —  
estimated to cost ________and to come from  
________ budget.
Teaching time is used 
to focus on positive behaviour at the start of the school year.  
Limited cost potentially some large paper for a classroom contract. Any costs will come from _______ budget. Behaviour
Management
P2E T ARGET 
LEVEL
(CIRCLE Y OUR 
SELF-A SSESSMENT 
LEVEL):
1 — 2
2 — 3
3 — 456MSTS SHOULD INCLUDE:
1. School Leadership e.g., school leader, school owner, academic directors etc.
2. Teacher representative
3. Parent / Guardian (representing parents/guardians and the PTA)
4. Governing Board member (or community representative)
5. Learner representative 
The multi-stakeholder team should be involved at the early stages of the school development process and 
continue throughout the implementation and review period. For example, once school leaders have created a 
comprehensive draft of the School Development Plan, they should consult with the MST to review and refine the 
document before it is submitted.
BENEFITS OF FORMING A MULTI-STAKEHOLDER TEAM:
 ●Different perspectives are included within the School Development Plan
 ●Leaders gain a better sense of the whole school experience (e.g., within the classroom)
 ●It provides opportunities for staff, parents and community members to contribute their views and represent 
their interests
 ●It provides a platform for MST members to have their voices heard and to participate in the running of the 
school - this is particularly important for female MST members
 ●It encourages teamwork and supports the development of key skills for those involved
The MST should expect to report to the school Governing Board, where present, to keep them informed of 
progress and challenges. The Board of Governors must also formally approve the School Development Plan 
(formal approval should be recorded and dated; for example, in the minutes of a governors’ meeting or on the 
plan itself).
During implementation, you should work with the multi-stakeholder team to monitor progress against the plan 
throughout the school year.
Schedule regular meetings with the MST to discuss successes and challenges, and to put in place any additional 
measures to ensure the School Development Plan is on track.
This step will involve collecting relevant data and ongoing feedback to ensure the action points listed on the SDP 
are being implemented and are having a positive impact.
There are many ways that you can monitor progress - here are a few suggestions:
1. MONITORING TEACHING AND LEARNING:
 ●Lesson observations
 ●Lesson plan monitoring
 ●Improvements in learner outcomes
2. MEASURING TEACHER KNOWLEDGE AND ATTITUDES:
 ●Teacher surveys and focus groups
 ●Feedback and quizzes during teacher professional development sessions
3. MEASURING IMPROVEMENTS IN SCHOOL POLICY AND PROCEDURE:
 ●Developing new accountability measures e.g., Governing Board
 ●Completing new policies and gaining approval from the Governing Board
 ●Scheduling staff meetings to discuss new initiatives and gain feedbackSTEP 5: Implement and Monitor57At the end of each academic year, the School Development Plan should be reviewed. Working with the multi- 
stakeholder team, you should reflect on progress towards your goals and action points and use this learning to 
inform the creation of the School Development Plan for the next academic year.
Towards the end of the SDP, the outcomes will be evaluated, and the process will then begin again with a new 
School Self-Assessment and School Development Plan.
STEP 6: Annually Review the School Development Plan
58
School Name:Pathways to Ex cellence (P2E) School Development Pla n
DOMAIN
PRIORITY  
DOMAIN 1:Which domain 
did you select ?
P2E T ARGET 
LEVEL
(CIRCLE) :
1 — 2
2 — 3
3 — 4ACTION POINTS IMPLEMEN TATION STEPS RESPONSIBLE
PERSON/S:MEASURING
SUCCESSTIMELINE COS T & 
RESOURCES
Which P2E action points 
will help you progress?What does this this look like 
in action in your school ?Who is leading 
each activity ?How will you 
monitor progress?When will each 
implementation 
step begin and 
be completed?Does it require  
money or resource s?Starts: Ends:
PRIORITY  
DOMAIN 2:
P2E T ARGET 
LEVEL
(CIRCLE) :
1 — 2
2 — 3
3 — 459PRIORITY 
DOMAIN 4:
P2E T ARGET 
LEVEL
(CIRCLE):
1 — 2
2 — 3
3 — 4PRIORITY 
DOMAIN 3:
P2E T ARGET 
LEVEL
(CIRCLE):
1 — 2
2 — 3
3 — 460BARRIER – an impediment to access and full participation by an individual i.e., a learner.
CHILD PROTECTION  – the responsibilities and activities undertaken to prevent, stop or respond to children being abused, 
exploited or neglected or discriminated against.
CORPORAL PUNISHMENT  – includes both physical punishment such as hitting and canning and cruel and degrading non-
physical punishments.
DIFFERENTIATING FACTORS  – the factors that make your school unique, different and better than other local schools. 
These factors are used as part of the schools marketing strategy.  
DIFFERENTIATION  – a teaching approach where the teacher adjusts the difficultly of individual tasks or provides separate 
tasks for learners depending on their level of need and ability.  
DISABILITY  – the result of the interaction between a person’s impairment and the barriers within the environment.
DISABILITY-INCLUSIVE EDUCATION  – this is an approach to education that ensures that physical, informational, attitudinal, 
environmental and financial barriers do not prevent learners with disabilities from accessing and participating in education.
DISABILITY STEREOTYPE  – a presumption made by person(s) without disabilities that certain behaviours, characteristics,
abilities or personality traits are typical people with disabilities.
EXTRA-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES  – additional activities that the school offers learners such as educational trips and after 
school clubs. The aim of these activities is to giver learners a broader range of experiences.
GENDER – a social construct that refers to the roles, behaviors, expressions, and identities that a society considers appropriate 
for men and women.
GENDER BIAS – a prejudice or discrimination based on a person’s gender, which can manifest in attitudes, beliefs, and practices.
GENDER AND DISABILITY-BASED VIOLENCE – any form of violence or abuse that is based on gender and disability, 
including sexual assault, domestic violence, and harassment.
GENDER EQUALITY – the state of equal rights, opportunities, and outcomes for all genders.
GENDER EQUITY – the process of creating fairness and justice for all genders by challenging and addressing systems of 
oppression and privilege.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING – an approach to addressing gender inequality by incorporating a gender perspective into 
policies, programs, and decision-making processes.
GENDER STEREOTYPE – a belief or idea that certain characteristics, abilities, or personality traits are typical of, or appropriate 
for, a particular gender.
GENDER-RESPONSIVE EDUCATION – an approach to teaching and learning that takes into account the unique needs and 
experiences of girls and boys, as well as other gender identities, in order to create a more inclusive and equitable learning 
environment for all students.
GENDER-TRANSFORMATIVE EDUCATION – an approach to education that aims to challenge and change traditional gender 
roles and stereotypes and promote gender equality. This type of education goes beyond addressing the immediate needs of 
girls and boys, to actively work to transform the underlying social norms and power relations that maintain gender inequality.
INCLUSION  – the practice of accommodating all learners at the school – in the same class, regardless of their academic, disability, 
gender or background.
INCLUSIVE EDUCATION – this is an approach to education that aims at ensuring equal opportunities, access and full participation 
by all learners regardless of their gender, disability or background.
LEARNER PROFILE  – a set of personal characteristics that the school wants to grow in its learners. The goal of a school’s 
Learner Profile is to develop each pupil as a whole person and make them a life-long learner. Glossary61
MARKING CODE – a written document that shows what different symbols and letters mean on marked work in school. 
For example ‘Sp’ means spelling mistake. This helps ensure consistency and understanding of marking. 
DEVELOPMENTAL MILESTONES  – the behavioural or physical skills seen as children grow and develop. It is important 
Early Childhood Teachers understand these so that they can support the development of their learners’. 
MULTI-STAKEHOLDER TEAM  – a team made up of school staff, both male and female, school governors and parents 
who work together to assess the school’s current needs and collaborate to create the School Development Plan.  
PARENT TEACHER ASSOCIATION (PTA)  – a formal organisation that includes parents and teachers with the aims of 
increasing parental involvement in the school. 
SAFER RECRUITMENT PRACTICES  – a set of practices to help make sure your staff and volunteers are suitable to work 
with children. This will include checks on qualifications, identity checks, criminal record checks, asking for references.
SCHOOL CURRICULUM – the school curriculum should match national curriculum guidelines. A school should build on 
the requirements of the national curriculum and put them together in the most exciting and effective ways for their school.
SCHOOL DEVELOPMENT PLAN  – is a written plan with a timeline of 1-3 years. The School Development Plan highlights 
what actions the school is taking to improve, who is responsible for making these actions happen and when they will  
be completed. 
SENIOR LEADERSHIP TEAM  – senior teachers in management positions such as head and deputy head teachers.
SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES (SEND) – unique learning needs and impairments that make it difficult 
for a learner to make progress in learning without additional support. This could be due to a specific learning difficulty, 
speech and language difficulties, emotional disturbances, mental health challenges, social difficulties or a disability such as  
autism, visual disability, hearing disability etc.
SPECIAL NEEDS EDUCATION  – education tailored towards meeting the educational needs of learners with special 
educational needs and/ or disabilities.
TEACHER TALK  – the amount of time in a lesson that a teacher spends talking. The amount of talking time should be 
balanced with giving learners time to talk/engage and work independently.   
PAGE 4:
INEE (2010). Gender Equality in and through Education: INEE Pocket Guide to Gender.
World Bank (2023). Social Inclusion. Online: https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/social-inclusion
INEE (2023). Disability-inclusive Education. Online: https://inee.org/eie-glossary/disability-inclusive-educationReferences 62© 2024 Opportunity International
edufinance.org
501(c)3 nonprofit. EIN: 540907624 (US)
1107713 (England and Wales)
SCO39692 (Scotland)
